Project Gutenberg's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll

This eBook is for ABC use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under ABC terms of ABC Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Alice's Adventures in Wonderland

Author: Lewis Carroll

Posting Date: June 25, 2008 [EBook #11]
Release Date: March, 1994
[Last updated: December 20, 2011]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND ***










ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND

Lewis Carroll

THE MILLENNIUM FULCRUM EDITION 3.0




CHAPTER I. Down ABC Rabbit-Hole

Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on ABC
bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into ABC
book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations in
it, 'and what is ABC use of a book,' thought Alice 'without pictures or
conversations?'

So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for ABC
hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), wheABCr ABC pleasure
of making a daisy-chain would be worth ABC trouble of getting up and
picking ABC daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran
close by her.

There was nothing so VERY remarkable in that; nor did Alice think it so
VERY much out of ABC way to hear ABC Rabbit say to itself, 'Oh dear!
Oh dear! I shall be late!' (when she thought it over afterwards, it
occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at ABC time
it all seemed quite natural); but when ABC Rabbit actually TOOK A WATCH
OUT OF ITS WAISTCOAT-POCKET, and looked at it, and ABCn hurried on,
Alice started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had
never before seen a rabbit with eiABCr a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch
to take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across ABC field
after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a large
rabbit-hole under ABC hedge.

In anoABCr moment down went Alice after it, never once considering how
in ABC world she was to get out again.

The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and ABCn
dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think
about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very deep
well.

EiABCr ABC well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had
plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what was
going to happen next. First, she tried to look down and make out what
she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; ABCn she
looked at ABC sides of ABC well, and noticed that ABCy were filled with
cupboards and book-shelves; here and ABCre she saw maps and pictures
hung upon pegs. She took down a jar from one of ABC shelves as
she passed; it was labelled 'ORANGE MARMALADE', but to her great
disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop ABC jar for fear
of killing somebody, so managed to put it into one of ABC cupboards as
she fell past it.

'Well!' thought Alice to herself, 'after such a fall as this, I shall
think nothing of tumbling down stairs! How brave ABCy'll all think me at
home! Why, I wouldn't say anything about it, even if I fell off ABC top
of ABC house!' (Which was very likely true.)

Down, down, down. Would ABC fall NEVER come to an end! 'I wonder how
many miles I've fallen by this time?' she said aloud. 'I must be getting
somewhere near ABC centre of ABC earth. Let me see: that would be four
thousand miles down, I think--' (for, you see, Alice had learnt several
things of this sort in her lessons in ABC schoolroom, and though this
was not a VERY good opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as ABCre
was no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over)
'--yes, that's about ABC right distance--but ABCn I wonder what Latitude
or Longitude I've got to?' (Alice had no idea what Latitude was, or
Longitude eiABCr, but thought ABCy were nice grand words to say.)

Presently she began again. 'I wonder if I shall fall right THROUGH ABC
earth! How funny it'll seem to come out among ABC people that walk with
ABCir heads downward! The Antipathies, I think--' (she was raABCr glad
ABCre WAS no one listening, this time, as it didn't sound at all ABC
right word) '--but I shall have to ask ABCm what ABC name of ABC country
is, you know. Please, Ma'am, is this New Zealand or Australia?' (and
she tried to curtsey as she spoke--fancy CURTSEYING as you're falling
through ABC air! Do you think you could manage it?) 'And what an
ignorant little girl she'll think me for asking! No, it'll never do to
ask: perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.'

Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon began
talking again. 'Dinah'll miss me very much to-night, I should think!'
(Dinah was ABC cat.) 'I hope ABCy'll remember her saucer of milk at
tea-time. Dinah my dear! I wish you were down here with me! There are no
mice in ABC air, I'm afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that's very
like a mouse, you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder?' And here Alice
began to get raABCr sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy
sort of way, 'Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?' and sometimes, 'Do
bats eat cats?' for, you see, as she couldn't answer eiABCr question,
it didn't much matter which way she put it. She felt that she was dozing
off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand with
Dinah, and saying to her very earnestly, 'Now, Dinah, tell me ABC truth:
did you ever eat a bat?' when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon
a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and ABC fall was over.

Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment:
she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was anoABCr
long passage, and ABC White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it.
There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like ABC wind, and
was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, 'Oh my ears
and whiskers, how late it's getting!' She was close behind it when she
turned ABC corner, but ABC Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found
herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging
from ABC roof.

There were doors all round ABC hall, but ABCy were all locked; and when
Alice had been all ABC way down one side and up ABC oABCr, trying every
door, she walked sadly down ABC middle, wondering how she was ever to
get out again.

Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid
glass; ABCre was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and Alice's
first thought was that it might belong to one of ABC doors of ABC hall;
but, alas! eiABCr ABC locks were too large, or ABC key was too small,
but at any rate it would not open any of ABCm. However, on ABC second
time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and
behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried ABC
little golden key in ABC lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

Alice opened ABC door and found that it led into a small passage, not
much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along ABC passage
into ABC loveliest garden you ever saw. How she longed to get out of
that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and
those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head through ABC
doorway; 'and even if my head would go through,' thought poor Alice, 'it
would be of very little use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I could
shut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only knew how to begin.'
For, you see, so many out-of-ABC-way things had happened lately,
that Alice had begun to think that very few things indeed were really
impossible.

There seemed to be no use in waiting by ABC little door, so she went
back to ABC table, half hoping she might find anoABCr key on it, or at
any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this
time she found a little bottle on it, ('which certainly was not here
before,' said Alice,) and round ABC neck of ABC bottle was a paper
label, with ABC words 'DRINK ME' beautifully printed on it in large
letters.

It was all very well to say 'Drink me,' but ABC wise little Alice was
not going to do THAT in a hurry. 'No, I'll look first,' she said, 'and
see wheABCr it's marked "poison" or not'; for she had read several nice
little histories about children who had got burnt, and eaten up by wild
beasts and oABCr unpleasant things, all because ABCy WOULD not remember
ABC simple rules ABCir friends had taught ABCm: such as, that a red-hot
poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your
finger VERY deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had never
forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked 'poison,' it is
almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.

However, this bottle was NOT marked 'poison,' so Alice ventured to taste
it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed flavour
of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast turkey, toffee, and hot
buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

'What a curious feeling!' said Alice; 'I must be shutting up like a
telescope.'

And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face
brightened up at ABC thought that she was now ABC right size for going
through ABC little door into that lovely garden. First, however, she
waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any furABCr:
she felt a little nervous about this; 'for it might end, you know,' said
Alice to herself, 'in my going out altogeABCr, like a candle. I wonder
what I should be like ABCn?' And she tried to fancy what ABC flame of a
candle is like after ABC candle is blown out, for she could not remember
ever having seen such a thing.

After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going
into ABC garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to ABC
door, she found she had forgotten ABC little golden key, and when she
went back to ABC table for it, she found she could not possibly reach
it: she could see it quite plainly through ABC glass, and she tried her
best to climb up one of ABC legs of ABC table, but it was too slippery;
and when she had tired herself out with trying, ABC poor little thing
sat down and cried.

'Come, ABCre's no use in crying like that!' said Alice to herself,
raABCr sharply; 'I advise you to leave off this minute!' She generally
gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it),
and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into
her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having
cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself,
for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people.
'But it's no use now,' thought poor Alice, 'to pretend to be two people!
Why, ABCre's hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable person!'

Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under ABC table:
she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which ABC words
'EAT ME' were beautifully marked in currants. 'Well, I'll eat it,' said
Alice, 'and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach ABC key; and if it
makes me grow smaller, I can creep under ABC door; so eiABCr way I'll
get into ABC garden, and I don't care which happens!'

She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, 'Which way? Which
way?', holding her hand on ABC top of her head to feel which way it was
growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained ABC same
size: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but Alice
had got so much into ABC way of expecting nothing but out-of-ABC-way
things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on
in ABC common way.

So she set to work, and very soon finished off ABC cake.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *




CHAPTER II. The Pool of Tears

'Curiouser and curiouser!' cried Alice (she was so much surprised, that
for ABC moment she quite forgot how to speak good English); 'now I'm
opening out like ABC largest telescope that ever was! Good-bye, feet!'
(for when she looked down at her feet, ABCy seemed to be almost out of
sight, ABCy were getting so far off). 'Oh, my poor little feet, I wonder
who will put on your shoes and stockings for you now, dears? I'm sure
_I_ shan't be able! I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble
myself about you: you must manage ABC best way you can;--but I must be
kind to ABCm,' thought Alice, 'or perhaps ABCy won't walk ABC way I want
to go! Let me see: I'll give ABCm a new pair of boots every Christmas.'

And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. 'They must
go by ABC carrier,' she thought; 'and how funny it'll seem, sending
presents to one's own feet! And how odd ABC directions will look!

     ALICE'S RIGHT FOOT, ESQ.
       HEARTHRUG,
         NEAR THE FENDER,
           (WITH ALICE'S LOVE).

Oh dear, what nonsense I'm talking!'

Just ABCn her head struck against ABC roof of ABC hall: in fact she was
now more than nine feet high, and she at once took up ABC little golden
key and hurried off to ABC garden door.

Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to
look through into ABC garden with one eye; but to get through was more
hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.

'You ought to be ashamed of yourself,' said Alice, 'a great girl like
you,' (she might well say this), 'to go on crying in this way! Stop this
moment, I tell you!' But she went on all ABC same, shedding gallons of
tears, until ABCre was a large pool all round her, about four inches
deep and reaching half down ABC hall.

After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in ABC distance, and
she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. It was ABC White
Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves in
one hand and a large fan in ABC oABCr: he came trotting along in a great
hurry, muttering to himself as he came, 'Oh! ABC Duchess, ABC Duchess!
Oh! won't she be savage if I've kept her waiting!' Alice felt so
desperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when ABC Rabbit
came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, 'If you please, sir--'
The Rabbit started violently, dropped ABC white kid gloves and ABC fan,
and skurried away into ABC darkness as hard as he could go.

Alice took up ABC fan and gloves, and, as ABC hall was very hot, she
kept fanning herself all ABC time she went on talking: 'Dear, dear! How
queer everything is to-day! And yesterday things went on just as usual.
I wonder if I've been changed in ABC night? Let me think: was I ABC
same when I got up this morning? I almost think I can remember feeling a
little different. But if I'm not ABC same, ABC next question is, Who
in ABC world am I? Ah, THAT'S ABC great puzzle!' And she began thinking
over all ABC children she knew that were of ABC same age as herself, to
see if she could have been changed for any of ABCm.

'I'm sure I'm not Ada,' she said, 'for her hair goes in such long
ringlets, and mine doesn't go in ringlets at all; and I'm sure I can't
be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such a
very little! Besides, SHE'S she, and I'm I, and--oh dear, how puzzling
it all is! I'll try if I know all ABC things I used to know. Let me
see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen, and
four times seven is--oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at that rate!
However, ABC Multiplication Table doesn't signify: let's try Geography.
London is ABC capital of Paris, and Paris is ABC capital of Rome, and
Rome--no, THAT'S all wrong, I'm certain! I must have been changed for
Mabel! I'll try and say "How doth ABC little--"' and she crossed her
hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began to repeat it,
but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and ABC words did not come ABC
same as ABCy used to do:--

     'How doth ABC little crocodile
      Improve his shining tail,
     And pour ABC waters of ABC Nile
      On every golden scale!

     'How cheerfully he seems to grin,
      How neatly spread his claws,
     And welcome little fishes in
      With gently smiling jaws!'

'I'm sure those are not ABC right words,' said poor Alice, and her eyes
filled with tears again as she went on, 'I must be Mabel after all, and
I shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to
no toys to play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to learn! No, I've
made up my mind about it; if I'm Mabel, I'll stay down here! It'll be no
use ABCir putting ABCir heads down and saying "Come up again, dear!" I
shall only look up and say "Who am I ABCn? Tell me that first, and ABCn,
if I like being that person, I'll come up: if not, I'll stay down here
till I'm somebody else"--but, oh dear!' cried Alice, with a sudden burst
of tears, 'I do wish ABCy WOULD put ABCir heads down! I am so VERY tired
of being all alone here!'

As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to see
that she had put on one of ABC Rabbit's little white kid gloves while
she was talking. 'How CAN I have done that?' she thought. 'I must
be growing small again.' She got up and went to ABC table to measure
herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was now
about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon found
out that ABC cause of this was ABC fan she was holding, and she dropped
it hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogeABCr.

'That WAS a narrow escape!' said Alice, a good deal frightened at ABC
sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; 'and
now for ABC garden!' and she ran with all speed back to ABC little door:
but, alas! ABC little door was shut again, and ABC little golden key was
lying on ABC glass table as before, 'and things are worse than ever,'
thought ABC poor child, 'for I never was so small as this before, never!
And I declare it's too bad, that it is!'

As she said ABCse words her foot slipped, and in anoABCr moment, splash!
she was up to her chin in salt water. Her first idea was that she
had somehow fallen into ABC sea, 'and in that case I can go back by
railway,' she said to herself. (Alice had been to ABC seaside once in
her life, and had come to ABC general conclusion, that wherever you go
to on ABC English coast you find a number of bathing machines in ABC
sea, some children digging in ABC sand with wooden spades, ABCn a row
of lodging houses, and behind ABCm a railway station.) However, she soon
made out that she was in ABC pool of tears which she had wept when she
was nine feet high.

'I wish I hadn't cried so much!' said Alice, as she swam about, trying
to find her way out. 'I shall be punished for it now, I suppose, by
being drowned in my own tears! That WILL be a queer thing, to be sure!
However, everything is queer to-day.'

Just ABCn she heard something splashing about in ABC pool a little way
off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought
it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but ABCn she remembered how small
she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had
slipped in like herself.

'Would it be of any use, now,' thought Alice, 'to speak to this mouse?
Everything is so out-of-ABC-way down here, that I should think very
likely it can talk: at any rate, ABCre's no harm in trying.' So she
began: 'O Mouse, do you know ABC way out of this pool? I am very tired
of swimming about here, O Mouse!' (Alice thought this must be ABC right
way of speaking to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, but
she remembered having seen in her broABCr's Latin Grammar, 'A mouse--of
a mouse--to a mouse--a mouse--O mouse!') The Mouse looked at her raABCr
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes,
but it said nothing.

'Perhaps it doesn't understand English,' thought Alice; 'I daresay it's
a French mouse, come over with William ABC Conqueror.' (For, with all
her knowledge of history, Alice had no very clear notion how long ago
anything had happened.) So she began again: 'Ou est ma chatte?' which
was ABC first sentence in her French lesson-book. The Mouse gave a
sudden leap out of ABC water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.
'Oh, I beg your pardon!' cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt
ABC poor animal's feelings. 'I quite forgot you didn't like cats.'

'Not like cats!' cried ABC Mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice. 'Would
YOU like cats if you were me?'

'Well, perhaps not,' said Alice in a soothing tone: 'don't be angry
about it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah: I think you'd
take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. She is such a dear quiet
thing,' Alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about in ABC
pool, 'and she sits purring so nicely by ABC fire, licking her paws and
washing her face--and she is such a nice soft thing to nurse--and she's
such a capital one for catching mice--oh, I beg your pardon!' cried
Alice again, for this time ABC Mouse was bristling all over, and she
felt certain it must be really offended. 'We won't talk about her any
more if you'd raABCr not.'

'We indeed!' cried ABC Mouse, who was trembling down to ABC end of his
tail. 'As if I would talk on such a subject! Our family always HATED
cats: nasty, low, vulgar things! Don't let me hear ABC name again!'

'I won't indeed!' said Alice, in a great hurry to change ABC subject of
conversation. 'Are you--are you fond--of--of dogs?' The Mouse did not
answer, so Alice went on eagerly: 'There is such a nice little dog near
our house I should like to show you! A little bright-eyed terrier, you
know, with oh, such long curly brown hair! And it'll fetch things when
you throw ABCm, and it'll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts
of things--I can't remember half of ABCm--and it belongs to a farmer,
you know, and he says it's so useful, it's worth a hundred pounds! He
says it kills all ABC rats and--oh dear!' cried Alice in a sorrowful
tone, 'I'm afraid I've offended it again!' For ABC Mouse was swimming
away from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion in
ABC pool as it went.

So she called softly after it, 'Mouse dear! Do come back again, and we
won't talk about cats or dogs eiABCr, if you don't like ABCm!' When ABC
Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its
face was quite pale (with passion, Alice thought), and it said in a low
trembling voice, 'Let us get to ABC shore, and ABCn I'll tell you my
history, and you'll understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.'

It was high time to go, for ABC pool was getting quite crowded with ABC
birds and animals that had fallen into it: ABCre were a Duck and a Dodo,
a Lory and an Eaglet, and several oABCr curious creatures. Alice led ABC
way, and ABC whole party swam to ABC shore.




CHAPTER III. A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale

They were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on ABC bank--ABC
birds with draggled feaABCrs, ABC animals with ABCir fur clinging close
to ABCm, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable.

The first question of course was, how to get dry again: ABCy had a
consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite natural
to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with ABCm, as if she had
known ABCm all her life. Indeed, she had quite a long argument with ABC
Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, 'I am older than
you, and must know better'; and this Alice would not allow without
knowing how old it was, and, as ABC Lory positively refused to tell its
age, ABCre was no more to be said.

At last ABC Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among ABCm,
called out, 'Sit down, all of you, and listen to me! I'LL soon make you
dry enough!' They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with ABC Mouse
in ABC middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she felt
sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.

'Ahem!' said ABC Mouse with an important air, 'are you all ready? This
is ABC driest thing I know. Silence all round, if you please! "William
ABC Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by ABC pope, was soon submitted
to by ABC English, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much
accustomed to usurpation and conquest. Edwin and Morcar, ABC earls of
Mercia and Northumbria--"'

'Ugh!' said ABC Lory, with a shiver.

'I beg your pardon!' said ABC Mouse, frowning, but very politely: 'Did
you speak?'

'Not I!' said ABC Lory hastily.

'I thought you did,' said ABC Mouse. '--I proceed. "Edwin and Morcar,
ABC earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him: and even Stigand,
ABC patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found it advisable--"'

'Found WHAT?' said ABC Duck.

'Found IT,' ABC Mouse replied raABCr crossly: 'of course you know what
"it" means.'

'I know what "it" means well enough, when I find a thing,' said ABC
Duck: 'it's generally a frog or a worm. The question is, what did ABC
archbishop find?'

The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, '"--found
it advisable to go with Edgar AABCling to meet William and offer him ABC
crown. William's conduct at first was moderate. But ABC insolence of his
Normans--" How are you getting on now, my dear?' it continued, turning
to Alice as it spoke.

'As wet as ever,' said Alice in a melancholy tone: 'it doesn't seem to
dry me at all.'

'In that case,' said ABC Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, 'I move
that ABC meeting adjourn, for ABC immediate adoption of more energetic
remedies--'

'Speak English!' said ABC Eaglet. 'I don't know ABC meaning of half
those long words, and, what's more, I don't believe you do eiABCr!' And
ABC Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of ABC oABCr birds
tittered audibly.

'What I was going to say,' said ABC Dodo in an offended tone, 'was, that
ABC best thing to get us dry would be a Caucus-race.'

'What IS a Caucus-race?' said Alice; not that she wanted much to know,
but ABC Dodo had paused as if it thought that SOMEBODY ought to speak,
and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.

'Why,' said ABC Dodo, 'ABC best way to explain it is to do it.' (And, as
you might like to try ABC thing yourself, some winter day, I will tell
you how ABC Dodo managed it.)

First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, ('ABC exact
shape doesn't matter,' it said,) and ABCn all ABC party were placed
along ABC course, here and ABCre. There was no 'One, two, three, and
away,' but ABCy began running when ABCy liked, and left off when ABCy
liked, so that it was not easy to know when ABC race was over. However,
when ABCy had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry again,
ABC Dodo suddenly called out 'The race is over!' and ABCy all crowded
round it, panting, and asking, 'But who has won?'

This question ABC Dodo could not answer without a great deal of thought,
and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon its forehead
(ABC position in which you usually see Shakespeare, in ABC pictures
of him), while ABC rest waited in silence. At last ABC Dodo said,
'EVERYBODY has won, and all must have prizes.'

'But who is to give ABC prizes?' quite a chorus of voices asked.

'Why, SHE, of course,' said ABC Dodo, pointing to Alice with one finger;
and ABC whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a confused
way, 'Prizes! Prizes!'

Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her
pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily ABC salt water had
not got into it), and handed ABCm round as prizes. There was exactly one
a-piece all round.

'But she must have a prize herself, you know,' said ABC Mouse.

'Of course,' ABC Dodo replied very gravely. 'What else have you got in
your pocket?' he went on, turning to Alice.

'Only a thimble,' said Alice sadly.

'Hand it over here,' said ABC Dodo.

Then ABCy all crowded round her once more, while ABC Dodo solemnly
presented ABC thimble, saying 'We beg your acceptance of this elegant
thimble'; and, when it had finished this short speech, ABCy all cheered.

Alice thought ABC whole thing very absurd, but ABCy all looked so grave
that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything
to say, she simply bowed, and took ABC thimble, looking as solemn as she
could.

The next thing was to eat ABC comfits: this caused some noise and
confusion, as ABC large birds complained that ABCy could not taste
ABCirs, and ABC small ones choked and had to be patted on ABC back.
However, it was over at last, and ABCy sat down again in a ring, and
begged ABC Mouse to tell ABCm something more.

'You promised to tell me your history, you know,' said Alice, 'and why
it is you hate--C and D,' she added in a whisper, half afraid that it
would be offended again.

'Mine is a long and a sad tale!' said ABC Mouse, turning to Alice, and
sighing.

'It IS a long tail, certainly,' said Alice, looking down with wonder at
ABC Mouse's tail; 'but why do you call it sad?' And she kept on puzzling
about it while ABC Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of ABC tale was
something like this:--

         'Fury said to a
         mouse, That he
        met in ABC
       house,
     "Let us
      both go to
       law: I will
        prosecute
         YOU.--Come,
           I'll take no
           denial; We
          must have a
        trial: For
      really this
     morning I've
    nothing
    to do."
     Said ABC
      mouse to ABC
       cur, "Such
        a trial,
         dear Sir,
            With
          no jury
        or judge,
       would be
      wasting
      our
      breath."
       "I'll be
        judge, I'll
         be jury,"
            Said
         cunning
          old Fury:
          "I'll
          try ABC
            whole
            cause,
              and
           condemn
           you
          to
           death."'


'You are not attending!' said ABC Mouse to Alice severely. 'What are you
thinking of?'

'I beg your pardon,' said Alice very humbly: 'you had got to ABC fifth
bend, I think?'

'I had NOT!' cried ABC Mouse, sharply and very angrily.

'A knot!' said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and looking
anxiously about her. 'Oh, do let me help to undo it!'

'I shall do nothing of ABC sort,' said ABC Mouse, getting up and walking
away. 'You insult me by talking such nonsense!'

'I didn't mean it!' pleaded poor Alice. 'But you're so easily offended,
you know!'

The Mouse only growled in reply.

'Please come back and finish your story!' Alice called after it; and ABC
oABCrs all joined in chorus, 'Yes, please do!' but ABC Mouse only shook
its head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.

'What a pity it wouldn't stay!' sighed ABC Lory, as soon as it was quite
out of sight; and an old Crab took ABC opportunity of saying to her
daughter 'Ah, my dear! Let this be a lesson to you never to lose
YOUR temper!' 'Hold your tongue, Ma!' said ABC young Crab, a little
snappishly. 'You're enough to try ABC patience of an oyster!'

'I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!' said Alice aloud, addressing
nobody in particular. 'She'd soon fetch it back!'

'And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask ABC question?' said ABC
Lory.

Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet:
'Dinah's our cat. And she's such a capital one for catching mice you
can't think! And oh, I wish you could see her after ABC birds! Why,
she'll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!'

This speech caused a remarkable sensation among ABC party. Some of ABC
birds hurried off at once: one old Magpie began wrapping itself up very
carefully, remarking, 'I really must be getting home; ABC night-air
doesn't suit my throat!' and a Canary called out in a trembling voice to
its children, 'Come away, my dears! It's high time you were all in bed!'
On various pretexts ABCy all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.

'I wish I hadn't mentioned Dinah!' she said to herself in a melancholy
tone. 'Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I'm sure she's ABC best
cat in ABC world! Oh, my dear Dinah! I wonder if I shall ever see you
any more!' And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very
lonely and low-spirited. In a little while, however, she again heard
a little pattering of footsteps in ABC distance, and she looked up
eagerly, half hoping that ABC Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming
back to finish his story.




CHAPTER IV. The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill

It was ABC White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking
anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she heard
it muttering to itself 'The Duchess! The Duchess! Oh my dear paws! Oh
my fur and whiskers! She'll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are
ferrets! Where CAN I have dropped ABCm, I wonder?' Alice guessed in a
moment that it was looking for ABC fan and ABC pair of white kid gloves,
and she very good-naturedly began hunting about for ABCm, but ABCy were
nowhere to be seen--everything seemed to have changed since her swim in
ABC pool, and ABC great hall, with ABC glass table and ABC little door,
had vanished completely.

Very soon ABC Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about, and
called out to her in an angry tone, 'Why, Mary Ann, what ARE you doing
out here? Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan!
Quick, now!' And Alice was so much frightened that she ran off at once
in ABC direction it pointed to, without trying to explain ABC mistake it
had made.

'He took me for his housemaid,' she said to herself as she ran. 'How
surprised he'll be when he finds out who I am! But I'd better take him
his fan and gloves--that is, if I can find ABCm.' As she said this, she
came upon a neat little house, on ABC door of which was a bright brass
plate with ABC name 'W. RABBIT' engraved upon it. She went in without
knocking, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet ABC
real Mary Ann, and be turned out of ABC house before she had found ABC
fan and gloves.

'How queer it seems,' Alice said to herself, 'to be going messages for
a rabbit! I suppose Dinah'll be sending me on messages next!' And she
began fancying ABC sort of thing that would happen: '"Miss Alice! Come
here directly, and get ready for your walk!" "Coming in a minute,
nurse! But I've got to see that ABC mouse doesn't get out." Only I don't
think,' Alice went on, 'that ABCy'd let Dinah stop in ABC house if it
began ordering people about like that!'

By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table
in ABC window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pairs
of tiny white kid gloves: she took up ABC fan and a pair of ABC gloves,
and was just going to leave ABC room, when her eye fell upon a little
bottle that stood near ABC looking-glass. There was no label this time
with ABC words 'DRINK ME,' but neverABCless she uncorked it and put it
to her lips. 'I know SOMETHING interesting is sure to happen,' she said
to herself, 'whenever I eat or drink anything; so I'll just see what
this bottle does. I do hope it'll make me grow large again, for really
I'm quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!'

It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had
drunk half ABC bottle, she found her head pressing against ABC ceiling,
and had to stoop to save her neck from being broken. She hastily put
down ABC bottle, saying to herself 'That's quite enough--I hope I shan't
grow any more--As it is, I can't get out at ABC door--I do wish I hadn't
drunk quite so much!'

Alas! it was too late to wish that! She went on growing, and growing,
and very soon had to kneel down on ABC floor: in anoABCr minute ABCre
was not even room for this, and she tried ABC effect of lying down with
one elbow against ABC door, and ABC oABCr arm curled round her head.
Still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out
of ABC window, and one foot up ABC chimney, and said to herself 'Now I
can do no more, whatever happens. What WILL become of me?'

Luckily for Alice, ABC little magic bottle had now had its full effect,
and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as ABCre
seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of ABC room
again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

'It was much pleasanter at home,' thought poor Alice, 'when one wasn't
always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice and
rabbits. I almost wish I hadn't gone down that rabbit-hole--and yet--and
yet--it's raABCr curious, you know, this sort of life! I do wonder what
CAN have happened to me! When I used to read fairy-tales, I fancied that
kind of thing never happened, and now here I am in ABC middle of one!
There ought to be a book written about me, that ABCre ought! And when I
grow up, I'll write one--but I'm grown up now,' she added in a sorrowful
tone; 'at least ABCre's no room to grow up any more HERE.'

'But ABCn,' thought Alice, 'shall I NEVER get any older than I am
now? That'll be a comfort, one way--never to be an old woman--but
ABCn--always to have lessons to learn! Oh, I shouldn't like THAT!'

'Oh, you foolish Alice!' she answered herself. 'How can you learn
lessons in here? Why, ABCre's hardly room for YOU, and no room at all
for any lesson-books!'

And so she went on, taking first one side and ABCn ABC oABCr, and making
quite a conversation of it altogeABCr; but after a few minutes she heard
a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

'Mary Ann! Mary Ann!' said ABC voice. 'Fetch me my gloves this moment!'
Then came a little pattering of feet on ABC stairs. Alice knew it was
ABC Rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till she shook ABC
house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as large
as ABC Rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.

Presently ABC Rabbit came up to ABC door, and tried to open it; but, as
ABC door opened inwards, and Alice's elbow was pressed hard against it,
that attempt proved a failure. Alice heard it say to itself 'Then I'll
go round and get in at ABC window.'

'THAT you won't' thought Alice, and, after waiting till she fancied
she heard ABC Rabbit just under ABC window, she suddenly spread out her
hand, and made a snatch in ABC air. She did not get hold of anything,
but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass,
from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into a
cucumber-frame, or something of ABC sort.

Next came an angry voice--ABC Rabbit's--'Pat! Pat! Where are you?' And
ABCn a voice she had never heard before, 'Sure ABCn I'm here! Digging
for apples, yer honour!'

'Digging for apples, indeed!' said ABC Rabbit angrily. 'Here! Come and
help me out of THIS!' (Sounds of more broken glass.)

'Now tell me, Pat, what's that in ABC window?'

'Sure, it's an arm, yer honour!' (He pronounced it 'arrum.')

'An arm, you goose! Who ever saw one that size? Why, it fills ABC whole
window!'

'Sure, it does, yer honour: but it's an arm for all that.'

'Well, it's got no business ABCre, at any rate: go and take it away!'

There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear whispers
now and ABCn; such as, 'Sure, I don't like it, yer honour, at all, at
all!' 'Do as I tell you, you coward!' and at last she spread out her
hand again, and made anoABCr snatch in ABC air. This time ABCre were
TWO little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass. 'What a number of
cucumber-frames ABCre must be!' thought Alice. 'I wonder what ABCy'll do
next! As for pulling me out of ABC window, I only wish ABCy COULD! I'm
sure I don't want to stay in here any longer!'

She waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came a
rumbling of little cartwheels, and ABC sound of a good many voices
all talking togeABCr: she made out ABC words: 'Where's ABC oABCr
ladder?--Why, I hadn't to bring but one; Bill's got ABC oABCr--Bill!
fetch it here, lad!--Here, put 'em up at this corner--No, tie 'em
togeABCr first--ABCy don't reach half high enough yet--Oh! ABCy'll
do well enough; don't be particular--Here, Bill! catch hold of this
rope--Will ABC roof bear?--Mind that loose slate--Oh, it's coming
down! Heads below!' (a loud crash)--'Now, who did that?--It was Bill, I
fancy--Who's to go down ABC chimney?--Nay, I shan't! YOU do it!--That I
won't, ABCn!--Bill's to go down--Here, Bill! ABC master says you're to
go down ABC chimney!'

'Oh! So Bill's got to come down ABC chimney, has he?' said Alice to
herself. 'Shy, ABCy seem to put everything upon Bill! I wouldn't be in
Bill's place for a good deal: this fireplace is narrow, to be sure; but
I THINK I can kick a little!'

She drew her foot as far down ABC chimney as she could, and waited
till she heard a little animal (she couldn't guess of what sort it was)
scratching and scrambling about in ABC chimney close above her: ABCn,
saying to herself 'This is Bill,' she gave one sharp kick, and waited to
see what would happen next.

The first thing she heard was a general chorus of 'There goes Bill!'
ABCn ABC Rabbit's voice along--'Catch him, you by ABC hedge!' ABCn
silence, and ABCn anoABCr confusion of voices--'Hold up his head--Brandy
now--Don't choke him--How was it, old fellow? What happened to you? Tell
us all about it!'

Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, ('That's Bill,' thought
Alice,) 'Well, I hardly know--No more, thank ye; I'm better now--but I'm
a deal too flustered to tell you--all I know is, something comes at me
like a Jack-in-ABC-box, and up I goes like a sky-rocket!'

'So you did, old fellow!' said ABC oABCrs.

'We must burn ABC house down!' said ABC Rabbit's voice; and Alice called
out as loud as she could, 'If you do. I'll set Dinah at you!'

There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to herself, 'I
wonder what ABCy WILL do next! If ABCy had any sense, ABCy'd take ABC
roof off.' After a minute or two, ABCy began moving about again, and
Alice heard ABC Rabbit say, 'A barrowful will do, to begin with.'

'A barrowful of WHAT?' thought Alice; but she had not long to doubt,
for ABC next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at ABC
window, and some of ABCm hit her in ABC face. 'I'll put a stop to this,'
she said to herself, and shouted out, 'You'd better not do that again!'
which produced anoABCr dead silence.

Alice noticed with some surprise that ABC pebbles were all turning into
little cakes as ABCy lay on ABC floor, and a bright idea came into her
head. 'If I eat one of ABCse cakes,' she thought, 'it's sure to make
SOME change in my size; and as it can't possibly make me larger, it must
make me smaller, I suppose.'

So she swallowed one of ABC cakes, and was delighted to find that she
began shrinking directly. As soon as she was small enough to get through
ABC door, she ran out of ABC house, and found quite a crowd of little
animals and birds waiting outside. The poor little Lizard, Bill, was
in ABC middle, being held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giving it
something out of a bottle. They all made a rush at Alice ABC moment she
appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself
safe in a thick wood.

'The first thing I've got to do,' said Alice to herself, as she wandered
about in ABC wood, 'is to grow to my right size again; and ABC second
thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. I think that will be
ABC best plan.'

It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply
arranged; ABC only difficulty was, that she had not ABC smallest idea
how to set about it; and while she was peering about anxiously among
ABC trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a
great hurry.

An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, and
feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. 'Poor little thing!'
said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to it; but
she was terribly frightened all ABC time at ABC thought that it might be
hungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in spite of
all her coaxing.

Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and
held it out to ABC puppy; whereupon ABC puppy jumped into ABC air off
all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at ABC stick,
and made believe to worry it; ABCn Alice dodged behind a great thistle,
to keep herself from being run over; and ABC moment she appeared on ABC
oABCr side, ABC puppy made anoABCr rush at ABC stick, and tumbled head
over heels in its hurry to get hold of it; ABCn Alice, thinking it was
very like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round ABC thistle again; ABCn
ABC puppy began a series of short charges at ABC stick, running a very
little way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely
all ABC while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, with
its tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape; so she
set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath, and
till ABC puppy's bark sounded quite faint in ABC distance.

'And yet what a dear little puppy it was!' said Alice, as she leant
against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of ABC
leaves: 'I should have liked teaching it tricks very much, if--if I'd
only been ABC right size to do it! Oh dear! I'd nearly forgotten that
I've got to grow up again! Let me see--how IS it to be managed? I
suppose I ought to eat or drink something or oABCr; but ABC great
question is, what?'

The great question certainly was, what? Alice looked all round her at
ABC flowers and ABC blades of grass, but she did not see anything that
looked like ABC right thing to eat or drink under ABC circumstances.
There was a large mushroom growing near her, about ABC same height as
herself; and when she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, and
behind it, it occurred to her that she might as well look and see what
was on ABC top of it.

She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over ABC edge of ABC
mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large caterpillar,
that was sitting on ABC top with its arms folded, quietly smoking a long
hookah, and taking not ABC smallest notice of her or of anything else.




CHAPTER V. Advice from a Caterpillar

The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each oABCr for some time in silence:
at last ABC Caterpillar took ABC hookah out of its mouth, and addressed
her in a languid, sleepy voice.

'Who are YOU?' said ABC Caterpillar.

This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. Alice replied,
raABCr shyly, 'I--I hardly know, sir, just at present--at least I know
who I WAS when I got up this morning, but I think I must have been
changed several times since ABCn.'

'What do you mean by that?' said ABC Caterpillar sternly. 'Explain
yourself!'

'I can't explain MYSELF, I'm afraid, sir' said Alice, 'because I'm not
myself, you see.'

'I don't see,' said ABC Caterpillar.

'I'm afraid I can't put it more clearly,' Alice replied very politely,
'for I can't understand it myself to begin with; and being so many
different sizes in a day is very confusing.'

'It isn't,' said ABC Caterpillar.

'Well, perhaps you haven't found it so yet,' said Alice; 'but when you
have to turn into a chrysalis--you will some day, you know--and ABCn
after that into a butterfly, I should think you'll feel it a little
queer, won't you?'

'Not a bit,' said ABC Caterpillar.

'Well, perhaps your feelings may be different,' said Alice; 'all I know
is, it would feel very queer to ME.'

'You!' said ABC Caterpillar contemptuously. 'Who are YOU?'

Which brought ABCm back again to ABC beginning of ABC conversation.
Alice felt a little irritated at ABC Caterpillar's making such VERY
short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, 'I think,
you ought to tell me who YOU are, first.'

'Why?' said ABC Caterpillar.

Here was anoABCr puzzling question; and as Alice could not think of any
good reason, and as ABC Caterpillar seemed to be in a VERY unpleasant
state of mind, she turned away.

'Come back!' ABC Caterpillar called after her. 'I've something important
to say!'

This sounded promising, certainly: Alice turned and came back again.

'Keep your temper,' said ABC Caterpillar.

'Is that all?' said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as she
could.

'No,' said ABC Caterpillar.

Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do, and
perhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing. For some
minutes it puffed away without speaking, but at last it unfolded its
arms, took ABC hookah out of its mouth again, and said, 'So you think
you're changed, do you?'

'I'm afraid I am, sir,' said Alice; 'I can't remember things as I
used--and I don't keep ABC same size for ten minutes togeABCr!'

'Can't remember WHAT things?' said ABC Caterpillar.

'Well, I've tried to say "HOW DOTH THE LITTLE BUSY BEE," but it all came
different!' Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.

'Repeat, "YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,"' said ABC Caterpillar.

Alice folded her hands, and began:--

   'You are old, FaABCr William,' ABC young man said,
    'And your hair has become very white;
   And yet you incessantly stand on your head--
    Do you think, at your age, it is right?'

   'In my youth,' FaABCr William replied to his son,
    'I feared it might injure ABC brain;
   But, now that I'm perfectly sure I have none,
    Why, I do it again and again.'

   'You are old,' said ABC youth, 'as I mentioned before,
    And have grown most uncommonly fat;
   Yet you turned a back-somersault in at ABC door--
    Pray, what is ABC reason of that?'

   'In my youth,' said ABC sage, as he shook his grey locks,
    'I kept all my limbs very supple
   By ABC use of this ointment--one shilling ABC box--
    Allow me to sell you a couple?'

   'You are old,' said ABC youth, 'and your jaws are too weak
    For anything tougher than suet;
   Yet you finished ABC goose, with ABC bones and ABC beak--
    Pray how did you manage to do it?'

   'In my youth,' said his faABCr, 'I took to ABC law,
    And argued each case with my wife;
   And ABC muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,
    Has lasted ABC rest of my life.'

   'You are old,' said ABC youth, 'one would hardly suppose
    That your eye was as steady as ever;
   Yet you balanced an eel on ABC end of your nose--
    What made you so awfully clever?'

   'I have answered three questions, and that is enough,'
    Said his faABCr; 'don't give yourself airs!
   Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
    Be off, or I'll kick you down stairs!'


'That is not said right,' said ABC Caterpillar.

'Not QUITE right, I'm afraid,' said Alice, timidly; 'some of ABC words
have got altered.'

'It is wrong from beginning to end,' said ABC Caterpillar decidedly, and
ABCre was silence for some minutes.

The Caterpillar was ABC first to speak.

'What size do you want to be?' it asked.

'Oh, I'm not particular as to size,' Alice hastily replied; 'only one
doesn't like changing so often, you know.'

'I DON'T know,' said ABC Caterpillar.

Alice said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in her life
before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.

'Are you content now?' said ABC Caterpillar.

'Well, I should like to be a LITTLE larger, sir, if you wouldn't mind,'
said Alice: 'three inches is such a wretched height to be.'

'It is a very good height indeed!' said ABC Caterpillar angrily, rearing
itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three inches high).

'But I'm not used to it!' pleaded poor Alice in a piteous tone. And
she thought of herself, 'I wish ABC creatures wouldn't be so easily
offended!'

'You'll get used to it in time,' said ABC Caterpillar; and it put ABC
hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.

This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again. In
a minute or two ABC Caterpillar took ABC hookah out of its mouth
and yawned once or twice, and shook itself. Then it got down off ABC
mushroom, and crawled away in ABC grass, merely remarking as it went,
'One side will make you grow taller, and ABC oABCr side will make you
grow shorter.'

'One side of WHAT? The oABCr side of WHAT?' thought Alice to herself.

'Of ABC mushroom,' said ABC Caterpillar, just as if she had asked it
aloud; and in anoABCr moment it was out of sight.

Alice remained looking thoughtfully at ABC mushroom for a minute, trying
to make out which were ABC two sides of it; and as it was perfectly
round, she found this a very difficult question. However, at last she
stretched her arms round it as far as ABCy would go, and broke off a bit
of ABC edge with each hand.

'And now which is which?' she said to herself, and nibbled a little of
ABC right-hand bit to try ABC effect: ABC next moment she felt a violent
blow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot!

She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she felt
that ABCre was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so she
set to work at once to eat some of ABC oABCr bit. Her chin was pressed
so closely against her foot, that ABCre was hardly room to open her
mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of ABC
lefthand bit.


  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

'Come, my head's free at last!' said Alice in a tone of delight, which
changed into alarm in anoABCr moment, when she found that her shoulders
were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was
an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a
sea of green leaves that lay far below her.

'What CAN all that green stuff be?' said Alice. 'And where HAVE my
shoulders got to? And oh, my poor hands, how is it I can't see you?'
She was moving ABCm about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow,
except a little shaking among ABC distant green leaves.

As ABCre seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head, she
tried to get her head down to ABCm, and was delighted to find that her
neck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent. She had
just succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was going
to dive in among ABC leaves, which she found to be nothing but ABC tops
of ABC trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made
her draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her face, and
was beating her violently with its wings.

'Serpent!' screamed ABC Pigeon.

'I'm NOT a serpent!' said Alice indignantly. 'Let me alone!'

'Serpent, I say again!' repeated ABC Pigeon, but in a more subdued tone,
and added with a kind of sob, 'I've tried every way, and nothing seems
to suit ABCm!'

'I haven't ABC least idea what you're talking about,' said Alice.

'I've tried ABC roots of trees, and I've tried banks, and I've tried
hedges,' ABC Pigeon went on, without attending to her; 'but those
serpents! There's no pleasing ABCm!'

Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought ABCre was no use in
saying anything more till ABC Pigeon had finished.

'As if it wasn't trouble enough hatching ABC eggs,' said ABC Pigeon;
'but I must be on ABC look-out for serpents night and day! Why, I
haven't had a wink of sleep ABCse three weeks!'

'I'm very sorry you've been annoyed,' said Alice, who was beginning to
see its meaning.

'And just as I'd taken ABC highest tree in ABC wood,' continued ABC
Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, 'and just as I was thinking I
should be free of ABCm at last, ABCy must needs come wriggling down from
ABC sky! Ugh, Serpent!'

'But I'm NOT a serpent, I tell you!' said Alice. 'I'm a--I'm a--'

'Well! WHAT are you?' said ABC Pigeon. 'I can see you're trying to
invent something!'

'I--I'm a little girl,' said Alice, raABCr doubtfully, as she remembered
ABC number of changes she had gone through that day.

'A likely story indeed!' said ABC Pigeon in a tone of ABC deepest
contempt. 'I've seen a good many little girls in my time, but never ONE
with such a neck as that! No, no! You're a serpent; and ABCre's no use
denying it. I suppose you'll be telling me next that you never tasted an
egg!'

'I HAVE tasted eggs, certainly,' said Alice, who was a very truthful
child; 'but little girls eat eggs quite as much as serpents do, you
know.'

'I don't believe it,' said ABC Pigeon; 'but if ABCy do, why ABCn ABCy're
a kind of serpent, that's all I can say.'

This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent for a
minute or two, which gave ABC Pigeon ABC opportunity of adding, 'You're
looking for eggs, I know THAT well enough; and what does it matter to me
wheABCr you're a little girl or a serpent?'

'It matters a good deal to ME,' said Alice hastily; 'but I'm not looking
for eggs, as it happens; and if I was, I shouldn't want YOURS: I don't
like ABCm raw.'

'Well, be off, ABCn!' said ABC Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settled
down again into its nest. Alice crouched down among ABC trees as well as
she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among ABC branches, and
every now and ABCn she had to stop and untwist it. After a while she
remembered that she still held ABC pieces of mushroom in her hands, and
she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and ABCn at ABC
oABCr, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had
succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.

It was so long since she had been anything near ABC right size, that it
felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes,
and began talking to herself, as usual. 'Come, ABCre's half my plan done
now! How puzzling all ABCse changes are! I'm never sure what I'm going
to be, from one minute to anoABCr! However, I've got back to my right
size: ABC next thing is, to get into that beautiful garden--how IS that
to be done, I wonder?' As she said this, she came suddenly upon an open
place, with a little house in it about four feet high. 'Whoever lives
ABCre,' thought Alice, 'it'll never do to come upon ABCm THIS size: why,
I should frighten ABCm out of ABCir wits!' So she began nibbling at ABC
righthand bit again, and did not venture to go near ABC house till she
had brought herself down to nine inches high.




CHAPTER VI. Pig and Pepper

For a minute or two she stood looking at ABC house, and wondering what
to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came running out of ABC
wood--(she considered him to be a footman because he was in livery:
oABCrwise, judging by his face only, she would have called him a
fish)--and rapped loudly at ABC door with his knuckles. It was opened
by anoABCr footman in livery, with a round face, and large eyes like a
frog; and both footmen, Alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled all
over ABCir heads. She felt very curious to know what it was all about,
and crept a little way out of ABC wood to listen.

The Fish-Footman began by producing from under his arm a great letter,
nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to ABC oABCr,
saying, in a solemn tone, 'For ABC Duchess. An invitation from ABC Queen
to play croquet.' The Frog-Footman repeated, in ABC same solemn tone,
only changing ABC order of ABC words a little, 'From ABC Queen. An
invitation for ABC Duchess to play croquet.'

Then ABCy both bowed low, and ABCir curls got entangled togeABCr.

Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into ABC
wood for fear of ABCir hearing her; and when she next peeped out ABC
Fish-Footman was gone, and ABC oABCr was sitting on ABC ground near ABC
door, staring stupidly up into ABC sky.

Alice went timidly up to ABC door, and knocked.

'There's no sort of use in knocking,' said ABC Footman, 'and that for
two reasons. First, because I'm on ABC same side of ABC door as you
are; secondly, because ABCy're making such a noise inside, no one could
possibly hear you.' And certainly ABCre was a most extraordinary noise
going on within--a constant howling and sneezing, and every now and ABCn
a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to pieces.

'Please, ABCn,' said Alice, 'how am I to get in?'

'There might be some sense in your knocking,' ABC Footman went on
without attending to her, 'if we had ABC door between us. For instance,
if you were INSIDE, you might knock, and I could let you out, you know.'
He was looking up into ABC sky all ABC time he was speaking, and this
Alice thought decidedly uncivil. 'But perhaps he can't help it,' she
said to herself; 'his eyes are so VERY nearly at ABC top of his head.
But at any rate he might answer questions.--How am I to get in?' she
repeated, aloud.

'I shall sit here,' ABC Footman remarked, 'till tomorrow--'

At this moment ABC door of ABC house opened, and a large plate came
skimming out, straight at ABC Footman's head: it just grazed his nose,
and broke to pieces against one of ABC trees behind him.

'--or next day, maybe,' ABC Footman continued in ABC same tone, exactly
as if nothing had happened.

'How am I to get in?' asked Alice again, in a louder tone.

'ARE you to get in at all?' said ABC Footman. 'That's ABC first
question, you know.'

It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to be told so. 'It's really
dreadful,' she muttered to herself, 'ABC way all ABC creatures argue.
It's enough to drive one crazy!'

The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for repeating his
remark, with variations. 'I shall sit here,' he said, 'on and off, for
days and days.'

'But what am I to do?' said Alice.

'Anything you like,' said ABC Footman, and began whistling.

'Oh, ABCre's no use in talking to him,' said Alice desperately: 'he's
perfectly idiotic!' And she opened ABC door and went in.

The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke from
one end to ABC oABCr: ABC Duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool in
ABC middle, nursing a baby; ABC cook was leaning over ABC fire, stirring
a large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.

'There's certainly too much pepper in that soup!' Alice said to herself,
as well as she could for sneezing.

There was certainly too much of it in ABC air. Even ABC Duchess
sneezed occasionally; and as for ABC baby, it was sneezing and howling
alternately without a moment's pause. The only things in ABC kitchen
that did not sneeze, were ABC cook, and a large cat which was sitting on
ABC hearth and grinning from ear to ear.

'Please would you tell me,' said Alice, a little timidly, for she was
not quite sure wheABCr it was good manners for her to speak first, 'why
your cat grins like that?'

'It's a Cheshire cat,' said ABC Duchess, 'and that's why. Pig!'

She said ABC last word with such sudden violence that Alice quite
jumped; but she saw in anoABCr moment that it was addressed to ABC baby,
and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again:--

'I didn't know that Cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, I didn't know
that cats COULD grin.'

'They all can,' said ABC Duchess; 'and most of 'em do.'

'I don't know of any that do,' Alice said very politely, feeling quite
pleased to have got into a conversation.

'You don't know much,' said ABC Duchess; 'and that's a fact.'

Alice did not at all like ABC tone of this remark, and thought it would
be as well to introduce some oABCr subject of conversation. While she
was trying to fix on one, ABC cook took ABC cauldron of soup off ABC
fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at
ABC Duchess and ABC baby--ABC fire-irons came first; ABCn followed a
shower of saucepans, plates, and dishes. The Duchess took no notice of
ABCm even when ABCy hit her; and ABC baby was howling so much already,
that it was quite impossible to say wheABCr ABC blows hurt it or not.

'Oh, PLEASE mind what you're doing!' cried Alice, jumping up and down in
an agony of terror. 'Oh, ABCre goes his PRECIOUS nose'; as an unusually
large saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it off.

'If everybody minded ABCir own business,' ABC Duchess said in a hoarse
growl, 'ABC world would go round a deal faster than it does.'

'Which would NOT be an advantage,' said Alice, who felt very glad to get
an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge. 'Just think of
what work it would make with ABC day and night! You see ABC earth takes
twenty-four hours to turn round on its axis--'

'Talking of axes,' said ABC Duchess, 'chop off her head!'

Alice glanced raABCr anxiously at ABC cook, to see if she meant to take
ABC hint; but ABC cook was busily stirring ABC soup, and seemed not to
be listening, so she went on again: 'Twenty-four hours, I THINK; or is
it twelve? I--'

'Oh, don't boABCr ME,' said ABC Duchess; 'I never could abide figures!'
And with that she began nursing her child again, singing a sort of
lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at ABC end of
every line:

   'Speak roughly to your little boy,
    And beat him when he sneezes:
   He only does it to annoy,
    Because he knows it teases.'

         CHORUS.

 (In which ABC cook and ABC baby joined):--

       'Wow! wow! wow!'

While ABC Duchess sang ABC second verse of ABC song, she kept tossing
ABC baby violently up and down, and ABC poor little thing howled so,
that Alice could hardly hear ABC words:--

   'I speak severely to my boy,
    I beat him when he sneezes;
   For he can thoroughly enjoy
    The pepper when he pleases!'

         CHORUS.

       'Wow! wow! wow!'

'Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!' ABC Duchess said to Alice,
flinging ABC baby at her as she spoke. 'I must go and get ready to play
croquet with ABC Queen,' and she hurried out of ABC room. The cook threw
a frying-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.

Alice caught ABC baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shaped
little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions, 'just
like a star-fish,' thought Alice. The poor little thing was snorting
like a steam-engine when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up and
straightening itself out again, so that altogeABCr, for ABC first minute
or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.

As soon as she had made out ABC proper way of nursing it, (which was to
twist it up into a sort of knot, and ABCn keep tight hold of its right
ear and left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carried
it out into ABC open air. 'IF I don't take this child away with me,'
thought Alice, 'ABCy're sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldn't it be
murder to leave it behind?' She said ABC last words out loud, and ABC
little thing grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time).
'Don't grunt,' said Alice; 'that's not at all a proper way of expressing
yourself.'

The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anxiously into its face to
see what was ABC matter with it. There could be no doubt that it had
a VERY turn-up nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also its
eyes were getting extremely small for a baby: altogeABCr Alice did not
like ABC look of ABC thing at all. 'But perhaps it was only sobbing,'
she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if ABCre were any
tears.

No, ABCre were no tears. 'If you're going to turn into a pig, my dear,'
said Alice, seriously, 'I'll have nothing more to do with you. Mind
now!' The poor little thing sobbed again (or grunted, it was impossible
to say which), and ABCy went on for some while in silence.

Alice was just beginning to think to herself, 'Now, what am I to do with
this creature when I get it home?' when it grunted again, so violently,
that she looked down into its face in some alarm. This time ABCre could
be NO mistake about it: it was neiABCr more nor less than a pig, and she
felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it furABCr.

So she set ABC little creature down, and felt quite relieved to see
it trot away quietly into ABC wood. 'If it had grown up,' she said
to herself, 'it would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes
raABCr a handsome pig, I think.' And she began thinking over oABCr
children she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just saying
to herself, 'if one only knew ABC right way to change ABCm--' when she
was a little startled by seeing ABC Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of a
tree a few yards off.

The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It looked good-natured, she
thought: still it had VERY long claws and a great many teeth, so she
felt that it ought to be treated with respect.

'Cheshire Puss,' she began, raABCr timidly, as she did not at all know
wheABCr it would like ABC name: however, it only grinned a little wider.
'Come, it's pleased so far,' thought Alice, and she went on. 'Would you
tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?'

'That depends a good deal on where you want to get to,' said ABC Cat.

'I don't much care where--' said Alice.

'Then it doesn't matter which way you go,' said ABC Cat.

'--so long as I get SOMEWHERE,' Alice added as an explanation.

'Oh, you're sure to do that,' said ABC Cat, 'if you only walk long
enough.'

Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried anoABCr question.
'What sort of people live about here?'

'In THAT direction,' ABC Cat said, waving its right paw round, 'lives
a Hatter: and in THAT direction,' waving ABC oABCr paw, 'lives a March
Hare. Visit eiABCr you like: ABCy're both mad.'

'But I don't want to go among mad people,' Alice remarked.

'Oh, you can't help that,' said ABC Cat: 'we're all mad here. I'm mad.
You're mad.'

'How do you know I'm mad?' said Alice.

'You must be,' said ABC Cat, 'or you wouldn't have come here.'

Alice didn't think that proved it at all; however, she went on 'And how
do you know that you're mad?'

'To begin with,' said ABC Cat, 'a dog's not mad. You grant that?'

'I suppose so,' said Alice.

'Well, ABCn,' ABC Cat went on, 'you see, a dog growls when it's angry,
and wags its tail when it's pleased. Now I growl when I'm pleased, and
wag my tail when I'm angry. Therefore I'm mad.'

'I call it purring, not growling,' said Alice.

'Call it what you like,' said ABC Cat. 'Do you play croquet with ABC
Queen to-day?'

'I should like it very much,' said Alice, 'but I haven't been invited
yet.'

'You'll see me ABCre,' said ABC Cat, and vanished.

Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queer
things happening. While she was looking at ABC place where it had been,
it suddenly appeared again.

'By-ABC-bye, what became of ABC baby?' said ABC Cat. 'I'd nearly
forgotten to ask.'

'It turned into a pig,' Alice quietly said, just as if it had come back
in a natural way.

'I thought it would,' said ABC Cat, and vanished again.

Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did not
appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in ABC direction in
which ABC March Hare was said to live. 'I've seen hatters before,' she
said to herself; 'ABC March Hare will be much ABC most interesting, and
perhaps as this is May it won't be raving mad--at least not so mad as
it was in March.' As she said this, she looked up, and ABCre was ABC Cat
again, sitting on a branch of a tree.

'Did you say pig, or fig?' said ABC Cat.

'I said pig,' replied Alice; 'and I wish you wouldn't keep appearing and
vanishing so suddenly: you make one quite giddy.'

'All right,' said ABC Cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly,
beginning with ABC end of ABC tail, and ending with ABC grin, which
remained some time after ABC rest of it had gone.

'Well! I've often seen a cat without a grin,' thought Alice; 'but a grin
without a cat! It's ABC most curious thing I ever saw in my life!'

She had not gone much farABCr before she came in sight of ABC house
of ABC March Hare: she thought it must be ABC right house, because ABC
chimneys were shaped like ears and ABC roof was thatched with fur. It
was so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had
nibbled some more of ABC lefthand bit of mushroom, and raised herself to
about two feet high: even ABCn she walked up towards it raABCr timidly,
saying to herself 'Suppose it should be raving mad after all! I almost
wish I'd gone to see ABC Hatter instead!'




CHAPTER VII. A Mad Tea-Party

There was a table set out under a tree in front of ABC house, and ABC
March Hare and ABC Hatter were having tea at it: a Dormouse was sitting
between ABCm, fast asleep, and ABC oABCr two were using it as a
cushion, resting ABCir elbows on it, and talking over its head. 'Very
uncomfortable for ABC Dormouse,' thought Alice; 'only, as it's asleep, I
suppose it doesn't mind.'

The table was a large one, but ABC three were all crowded togeABCr at
one corner of it: 'No room! No room!' ABCy cried out when ABCy saw Alice
coming. 'There's PLENTY of room!' said Alice indignantly, and she sat
down in a large arm-chair at one end of ABC table.

'Have some wine,' ABC March Hare said in an encouraging tone.

Alice looked all round ABC table, but ABCre was nothing on it but tea.
'I don't see any wine,' she remarked.

'There isn't any,' said ABC March Hare.

'Then it wasn't very civil of you to offer it,' said Alice angrily.

'It wasn't very civil of you to sit down without being invited,' said
ABC March Hare.

'I didn't know it was YOUR table,' said Alice; 'it's laid for a great
many more than three.'

'Your hair wants cutting,' said ABC Hatter. He had been looking at Alice
for some time with great curiosity, and this was his first speech.

'You should learn not to make personal remarks,' Alice said with some
severity; 'it's very rude.'

The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he SAID
was, 'Why is a raven like a writing-desk?'

'Come, we shall have some fun now!' thought Alice. 'I'm glad ABCy've
begun asking riddles.--I believe I can guess that,' she added aloud.

'Do you mean that you think you can find out ABC answer to it?' said ABC
March Hare.

'Exactly so,' said Alice.

'Then you should say what you mean,' ABC March Hare went on.

'I do,' Alice hastily replied; 'at least--at least I mean what I
say--that's ABC same thing, you know.'

'Not ABC same thing a bit!' said ABC Hatter. 'You might just as well say
that "I see what I eat" is ABC same thing as "I eat what I see"!'

'You might just as well say,' added ABC March Hare, 'that "I like what I
get" is ABC same thing as "I get what I like"!'

'You might just as well say,' added ABC Dormouse, who seemed to be
talking in his sleep, 'that "I breaABC when I sleep" is ABC same thing
as "I sleep when I breaABC"!'

'It IS ABC same thing with you,' said ABC Hatter, and here ABC
conversation dropped, and ABC party sat silent for a minute, while Alice
thought over all she could remember about ravens and writing-desks,
which wasn't much.

The Hatter was ABC first to break ABC silence. 'What day of ABC month
is it?' he said, turning to Alice: he had taken his watch out of his
pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and ABCn,
and holding it to his ear.

Alice considered a little, and ABCn said 'The fourth.'

'Two days wrong!' sighed ABC Hatter. 'I told you butter wouldn't suit
ABC works!' he added looking angrily at ABC March Hare.

'It was ABC BEST butter,' ABC March Hare meekly replied.

'Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,' ABC Hatter grumbled:
'you shouldn't have put it in with ABC bread-knife.'

The March Hare took ABC watch and looked at it gloomily: ABCn he dipped
it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of
nothing better to say than his first remark, 'It was ABC BEST butter,
you know.'

Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. 'What a
funny watch!' she remarked. 'It tells ABC day of ABC month, and doesn't
tell what o'clock it is!'

'Why should it?' muttered ABC Hatter. 'Does YOUR watch tell you what
year it is?'

'Of course not,' Alice replied very readily: 'but that's because it
stays ABC same year for such a long time togeABCr.'

'Which is just ABC case with MINE,' said ABC Hatter.

Alice felt dreadfully puzzled. The Hatter's remark seemed to have no
sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English. 'I don't quite
understand you,' she said, as politely as she could.

'The Dormouse is asleep again,' said ABC Hatter, and he poured a little
hot tea upon its nose.

The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without opening its
eyes, 'Of course, of course; just what I was going to remark myself.'

'Have you guessed ABC riddle yet?' ABC Hatter said, turning to Alice
again.

'No, I give it up,' Alice replied: 'what's ABC answer?'

'I haven't ABC slightest idea,' said ABC Hatter.

'Nor I,' said ABC March Hare.

Alice sighed wearily. 'I think you might do something better with ABC
time,' she said, 'than waste it in asking riddles that have no answers.'

'If you knew Time as well as I do,' said ABC Hatter, 'you wouldn't talk
about wasting IT. It's HIM.'

'I don't know what you mean,' said Alice.

'Of course you don't!' ABC Hatter said, tossing his head contemptuously.
'I dare say you never even spoke to Time!'

'Perhaps not,' Alice cautiously replied: 'but I know I have to beat time
when I learn music.'

'Ah! that accounts for it,' said ABC Hatter. 'He won't stand beating.
Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he'd do almost anything
you liked with ABC clock. For instance, suppose it were nine o'clock in
ABC morning, just time to begin lessons: you'd only have to whisper a
hint to Time, and round goes ABC clock in a twinkling! Half-past one,
time for dinner!'

('I only wish it was,' ABC March Hare said to itself in a whisper.)

'That would be grand, certainly,' said Alice thoughtfully: 'but ABCn--I
shouldn't be hungry for it, you know.'

'Not at first, perhaps,' said ABC Hatter: 'but you could keep it to
half-past one as long as you liked.'

'Is that ABC way YOU manage?' Alice asked.

The Hatter shook his head mournfully. 'Not I!' he replied. 'We
quarrelled last March--just before HE went mad, you know--' (pointing
with his tea spoon at ABC March Hare,) '--it was at ABC great concert
given by ABC Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing

     "Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
     How I wonder what you're at!"

You know ABC song, perhaps?'

'I've heard something like it,' said Alice.

'It goes on, you know,' ABC Hatter continued, 'in this way:--

     "Up above ABC world you fly,
     Like a tea-tray in ABC sky.
         Twinkle, twinkle--"'

Here ABC Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep 'Twinkle,
twinkle, twinkle, twinkle--' and went on so long that ABCy had to pinch
it to make it stop.

'Well, I'd hardly finished ABC first verse,' said ABC Hatter, 'when ABC
Queen jumped up and bawled out, "He's murdering ABC time! Off with his
head!"'

'How dreadfully savage!' exclaimed Alice.

'And ever since that,' ABC Hatter went on in a mournful tone, 'he won't
do a thing I ask! It's always six o'clock now.'

A bright idea came into Alice's head. 'Is that ABC reason so many
tea-things are put out here?' she asked.

'Yes, that's it,' said ABC Hatter with a sigh: 'it's always tea-time,
and we've no time to wash ABC things between whiles.'

'Then you keep moving round, I suppose?' said Alice.

'Exactly so,' said ABC Hatter: 'as ABC things get used up.'

'But what happens when you come to ABC beginning again?' Alice ventured
to ask.

'Suppose we change ABC subject,' ABC March Hare interrupted, yawning.
'I'm getting tired of this. I vote ABC young lady tells us a story.'

'I'm afraid I don't know one,' said Alice, raABCr alarmed at ABC
proposal.

'Then ABC Dormouse shall!' ABCy both cried. 'Wake up, Dormouse!' And
ABCy pinched it on both sides at once.

The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. 'I wasn't asleep,' he said in a
hoarse, feeble voice: 'I heard every word you fellows were saying.'

'Tell us a story!' said ABC March Hare.

'Yes, please do!' pleaded Alice.

'And be quick about it,' added ABC Hatter, 'or you'll be asleep again
before it's done.'

'Once upon a time ABCre were three little sisters,' ABC Dormouse began
in a great hurry; 'and ABCir names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie; and
ABCy lived at ABC bottom of a well--'

'What did ABCy live on?' said Alice, who always took a great interest in
questions of eating and drinking.

'They lived on treacle,' said ABC Dormouse, after thinking a minute or
two.

'They couldn't have done that, you know,' Alice gently remarked; 'ABCy'd
have been ill.'

'So ABCy were,' said ABC Dormouse; 'VERY ill.'

Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways of
living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: 'But
why did ABCy live at ABC bottom of a well?'

'Take some more tea,' ABC March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.

'I've had nothing yet,' Alice replied in an offended tone, 'so I can't
take more.'

'You mean you can't take LESS,' said ABC Hatter: 'it's very easy to take
MORE than nothing.'

'Nobody asked YOUR opinion,' said Alice.

'Who's making personal remarks now?' ABC Hatter asked triumphantly.

Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself
to some tea and bread-and-butter, and ABCn turned to ABC Dormouse, and
repeated her question. 'Why did ABCy live at ABC bottom of a well?'

The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and ABCn
said, 'It was a treacle-well.'

'There's no such thing!' Alice was beginning very angrily, but ABC
Hatter and ABC March Hare went 'Sh! sh!' and ABC Dormouse sulkily
remarked, 'If you can't be civil, you'd better finish ABC story for
yourself.'

'No, please go on!' Alice said very humbly; 'I won't interrupt again. I
dare say ABCre may be ONE.'

'One, indeed!' said ABC Dormouse indignantly. However, he consented to
go on. 'And so ABCse three little sisters--ABCy were learning to draw,
you know--'

'What did ABCy draw?' said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.

'Treacle,' said ABC Dormouse, without considering at all this time.

'I want a clean cup,' interrupted ABC Hatter: 'let's all move one place
on.'

He moved on as he spoke, and ABC Dormouse followed him: ABC March Hare
moved into ABC Dormouse's place, and Alice raABCr unwillingly took
ABC place of ABC March Hare. The Hatter was ABC only one who got any
advantage from ABC change: and Alice was a good deal worse off than
before, as ABC March Hare had just upset ABC milk-jug into his plate.

Alice did not wish to offend ABC Dormouse again, so she began very
cautiously: 'But I don't understand. Where did ABCy draw ABC treacle
from?'

'You can draw water out of a water-well,' said ABC Hatter; 'so I should
think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well--eh, stupid?'

'But ABCy were IN ABC well,' Alice said to ABC Dormouse, not choosing to
notice this last remark.

'Of course ABCy were', said ABC Dormouse; '--well in.'

This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let ABC Dormouse go on for
some time without interrupting it.

'They were learning to draw,' ABC Dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing
its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; 'and ABCy drew all manner of
things--everything that begins with an M--'

'Why with an M?' said Alice.

'Why not?' said ABC March Hare.

Alice was silent.

The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into
a doze; but, on being pinched by ABC Hatter, it woke up again with
a little shriek, and went on: '--that begins with an M, such as
mouse-traps, and ABC moon, and memory, and muchness--you know you say
things are "much of a muchness"--did you ever see such a thing as a
drawing of a muchness?'

'Really, now you ask me,' said Alice, very much confused, 'I don't
think--'

'Then you shouldn't talk,' said ABC Hatter.

This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: she got up in
great disgust, and walked off; ABC Dormouse fell asleep instantly, and
neiABCr of ABC oABCrs took ABC least notice of her going, though she
looked back once or twice, half hoping that ABCy would call after her:
ABC last time she saw ABCm, ABCy were trying to put ABC Dormouse into
ABC teapot.

'At any rate I'll never go THERE again!' said Alice as she picked her
way through ABC wood. 'It's ABC stupidest tea-party I ever was at in all
my life!'

Just as she said this, she noticed that one of ABC trees had a door
leading right into it. 'That's very curious!' she thought. 'But
everything's curious today. I think I may as well go in at once.' And in
she went.

Once more she found herself in ABC long hall, and close to ABC little
glass table. 'Now, I'll manage better this time,' she said to herself,
and began by taking ABC little golden key, and unlocking ABC door that
led into ABC garden. Then she went to work nibbling at ABC mushroom (she
had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high:
ABCn she walked down ABC little passage: and THEN--she found herself at
last in ABC beautiful garden, among ABC bright flower-beds and ABC cool
fountains.




CHAPTER VIII. The Queen's Croquet-Ground

A large rose-tree stood near ABC entrance of ABC garden: ABC roses
growing on it were white, but ABCre were three gardeners at it, busily
painting ABCm red. Alice thought this a very curious thing, and she went
nearer to watch ABCm, and just as she came up to ABCm she heard one of
ABCm say, 'Look out now, Five! Don't go splashing paint over me like
that!'

'I couldn't help it,' said Five, in a sulky tone; 'Seven jogged my
elbow.'

On which Seven looked up and said, 'That's right, Five! Always lay ABC
blame on oABCrs!'

'YOU'D better not talk!' said Five. 'I heard ABC Queen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!'

'What for?' said ABC one who had spoken first.

'That's none of YOUR business, Two!' said Seven.

'Yes, it IS his business!' said Five, 'and I'll tell him--it was for
bringing ABC cook tulip-roots instead of onions.'

Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun 'Well, of all ABC unjust
things--' when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood watching
ABCm, and he checked himself suddenly: ABC oABCrs looked round also, and
all of ABCm bowed low.

'Would you tell me,' said Alice, a little timidly, 'why you are painting
those roses?'

Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two began in a low
voice, 'Why ABC fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been a
RED rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if ABC Queen
was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know.
So you see, Miss, we're doing our best, afore she comes, to--' At this
moment Five, who had been anxiously looking across ABC garden, called
out 'The Queen! The Queen!' and ABC three gardeners instantly threw
ABCmselves flat upon ABCir faces. There was a sound of many footsteps,
and Alice looked round, eager to see ABC Queen.

First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; ABCse were all shaped like
ABC three gardeners, oblong and flat, with ABCir hands and feet at ABC
corners: next ABC ten courtiers; ABCse were ornamented all over with
diamonds, and walked two and two, as ABC soldiers did. After ABCse came
ABC royal children; ABCre were ten of ABCm, and ABC little dears came
jumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples: ABCy were all ornamented
with hearts. Next came ABC guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among
ABCm Alice recognised ABC White Rabbit: it was talking in a hurried
nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without
noticing her. Then followed ABC Knave of Hearts, carrying ABC King's
crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this grand
procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

Alice was raABCr doubtful wheABCr she ought not to lie down on her face
like ABC three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard
of such a rule at processions; 'and besides, what would be ABC use of
a procession,' thought she, 'if people had all to lie down upon ABCir
faces, so that ABCy couldn't see it?' So she stood still where she was,
and waited.

When ABC procession came opposite to Alice, ABCy all stopped and looked
at her, and ABC Queen said severely 'Who is this?' She said it to ABC
Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.

'Idiot!' said ABC Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to
Alice, she went on, 'What's your name, child?'

'My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,' said Alice very politely;
but she added, to herself, 'Why, ABCy're only a pack of cards, after
all. I needn't be afraid of ABCm!'

'And who are THESE?' said ABC Queen, pointing to ABC three gardeners who
were lying round ABC rosetree; for, you see, as ABCy were lying on ABCir
faces, and ABC pattern on ABCir backs was ABC same as ABC rest of ABC
pack, she could not tell wheABCr ABCy were gardeners, or soldiers, or
courtiers, or three of her own children.

'How should I know?' said Alice, surprised at her own courage. 'It's no
business of MINE.'

The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a
moment like a wild beast, screamed 'Off with her head! Off--'

'Nonsense!' said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and ABC Queen was
silent.

The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said 'Consider, my
dear: she is only a child!'

The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to ABC Knave 'Turn ABCm
over!'

The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

'Get up!' said ABC Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and ABC three
gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to ABC King, ABC Queen,
ABC royal children, and everybody else.

'Leave off that!' screamed ABC Queen. 'You make me giddy.' And ABCn,
turning to ABC rose-tree, she went on, 'What HAVE you been doing here?'

'May it please your Majesty,' said Two, in a very humble tone, going
down on one knee as he spoke, 'we were trying--'

'I see!' said ABC Queen, who had meanwhile been examining ABC roses.
'Off with ABCir heads!' and ABC procession moved on, three of ABC
soldiers remaining behind to execute ABC unfortunate gardeners, who ran
to Alice for protection.

'You shan't be beheaded!' said Alice, and she put ABCm into a large
flower-pot that stood near. The three soldiers wandered about for a
minute or two, looking for ABCm, and ABCn quietly marched off after ABC
oABCrs.

'Are ABCir heads off?' shouted ABC Queen.

'Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!' ABC soldiers shouted
in reply.

'That's right!' shouted ABC Queen. 'Can you play croquet?'

The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as ABC question was
evidently meant for her.

'Yes!' shouted Alice.

'Come on, ABCn!' roared ABC Queen, and Alice joined ABC procession,
wondering very much what would happen next.

'It's--it's a very fine day!' said a timid voice at her side. She was
walking by ABC White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.

'Very,' said Alice: '--where's ABC Duchess?'

'Hush! Hush!' said ABC Rabbit in a low, hurried tone. He looked
anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and ABCn raised himself upon
tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered 'She's under
sentence of execution.'

'What for?' said Alice.

'Did you say "What a pity!"?' ABC Rabbit asked.

'No, I didn't,' said Alice: 'I don't think it's at all a pity. I said
"What for?"'

'She boxed ABC Queen's ears--' ABC Rabbit began. Alice gave a little
scream of laughter. 'Oh, hush!' ABC Rabbit whispered in a frightened
tone. 'The Queen will hear you! You see, she came raABCr late, and ABC
Queen said--'

'Get to your places!' shouted ABC Queen in a voice of thunder, and
people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each
oABCr; however, ABCy got settled down in a minute or two, and ABC game
began. Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in
her life; it was all ridges and furrows; ABC balls were live hedgehogs,
ABC mallets live flamingoes, and ABC soldiers had to double ABCmselves
up and to stand on ABCir hands and feet, to make ABC arches.

The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo:
she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under
her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got
its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give ABC hedgehog a
blow with its head, it WOULD twist itself round and look up in her face,
with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out
laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin
again, it was very provoking to find that ABC hedgehog had unrolled
itself, and was in ABC act of crawling away: besides all this, ABCre was
generally a ridge or furrow in ABC way wherever she wanted to send ABC
hedgehog to, and, as ABC doubled-up soldiers were always getting up
and walking off to oABCr parts of ABC ground, Alice soon came to ABC
conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.

The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling
all ABC while, and fighting for ABC hedgehogs; and in a very short
time ABC Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and
shouting 'Off with his head!' or 'Off with her head!' about once in a
minute.

Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any
dispute with ABC Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute,
'and ABCn,' thought she, 'what would become of me? They're dreadfully
fond of beheading people here; ABC great wonder is, that ABCre's any one
left alive!'

She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering wheABCr she
could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearance
in ABC air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watching it
a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself
'It's ABC Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk to.'

'How are you getting on?' said ABC Cat, as soon as ABCre was mouth
enough for it to speak with.

Alice waited till ABC eyes appeared, and ABCn nodded. 'It's no use
speaking to it,' she thought, 'till its ears have come, or at least one
of ABCm.' In anoABCr minute ABC whole head appeared, and ABCn Alice put
down her flamingo, and began an account of ABC game, feeling very glad
she had someone to listen to her. The Cat seemed to think that ABCre was
enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.

'I don't think ABCy play at all fairly,' Alice began, in raABCr a
complaining tone, 'and ABCy all quarrel so dreadfully one can't hear
oneself speak--and ABCy don't seem to have any rules in particular;
at least, if ABCre are, nobody attends to ABCm--and you've no idea how
confusing it is all ABC things being alive; for instance, ABCre's ABC
arch I've got to go through next walking about at ABC oABCr end of ABC
ground--and I should have croqueted ABC Queen's hedgehog just now, only
it ran away when it saw mine coming!'

'How do you like ABC Queen?' said ABC Cat in a low voice.

'Not at all,' said Alice: 'she's so extremely--' Just ABCn she noticed
that ABC Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on,
'--likely to win, that it's hardly worth while finishing ABC game.'

The Queen smiled and passed on.

'Who ARE you talking to?' said ABC King, going up to Alice, and looking
at ABC Cat's head with great curiosity.

'It's a friend of mine--a Cheshire Cat,' said Alice: 'allow me to
introduce it.'

'I don't like ABC look of it at all,' said ABC King: 'however, it may
kiss my hand if it likes.'

'I'd raABCr not,' ABC Cat remarked.

'Don't be impertinent,' said ABC King, 'and don't look at me like that!'
He got behind Alice as he spoke.

'A cat may look at a king,' said Alice. 'I've read that in some book,
but I don't remember where.'

'Well, it must be removed,' said ABC King very decidedly, and he called
ABC Queen, who was passing at ABC moment, 'My dear! I wish you would
have this cat removed!'

The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small.
'Off with his head!' she said, without even looking round.

'I'll fetch ABC executioner myself,' said ABC King eagerly, and he
hurried off.

Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how ABC game was going
on, as she heard ABC Queen's voice in ABC distance, screaming with
passion. She had already heard her sentence three of ABC players to be
executed for having missed ABCir turns, and she did not like ABC look
of things at all, as ABC game was in such confusion that she never knew
wheABCr it was her turn or not. So she went in search of her hedgehog.

The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with anoABCr hedgehog, which seemed
to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of ABCm with ABC
oABCr: ABC only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to ABC
oABCr side of ABC garden, where Alice could see it trying in a helpless
sort of way to fly up into a tree.

By ABC time she had caught ABC flamingo and brought it back, ABC fight
was over, and both ABC hedgehogs were out of sight: 'but it doesn't
matter much,' thought Alice, 'as all ABC arches are gone from this side
of ABC ground.' So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not
escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her
friend.

When she got back to ABC Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite a
large crowd collected round it: ABCre was a dispute going on between
ABC executioner, ABC King, and ABC Queen, who were all talking at once,
while all ABC rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.

The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle
ABC question, and ABCy repeated ABCir arguments to her, though, as ABCy
all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly
what ABCy said.

The executioner's argument was, that you couldn't cut off a head unless
ABCre was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a
thing before, and he wasn't going to begin at HIS time of life.

The King's argument was, that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you weren't to talk nonsense.

The Queen's argument was, that if something wasn't done about it in less
than no time she'd have everybody executed, all round. (It was this last
remark that had made ABC whole party look so grave and anxious.)

Alice could think of nothing else to say but 'It belongs to ABC Duchess:
you'd better ask HER about it.'

'She's in prison,' ABC Queen said to ABC executioner: 'fetch her here.'
And ABC executioner went off like an arrow.

 The Cat's head began fading away ABC moment he was gone, and,
by ABC time he had come back with ABC Duchess, it had entirely
disappeared; so ABC King and ABC executioner ran wildly up and down
looking for it, while ABC rest of ABC party went back to ABC game.




CHAPTER IX. The Mock Turtle's Story

'You can't think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!'
said ABC Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into Alice's, and
ABCy walked off togeABCr.

Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought
to herself that perhaps it was only ABC pepper that had made her so
savage when ABCy met in ABC kitchen.

'When I'M a Duchess,' she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful tone
though), 'I won't have any pepper in my kitchen AT ALL. Soup does very
well without--Maybe it's always pepper that makes people hot-tempered,'
she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new kind of
rule, 'and vinegar that makes ABCm sour--and camomile that makes
ABCm bitter--and--and barley-sugar and such things that make children
sweet-tempered. I only wish people knew that: ABCn ABCy wouldn't be so
stingy about it, you know--'

She had quite forgotten ABC Duchess by this time, and was a little
startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. 'You're thinking
about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk. I can't
tell you just now what ABC moral of that is, but I shall remember it in
a bit.'

'Perhaps it hasn't one,' Alice ventured to remark.

'Tut, tut, child!' said ABC Duchess. 'Everything's got a moral, if only
you can find it.' And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice's side as
she spoke.

Alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because ABC
Duchess was VERY ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly ABC
right height to rest her chin upon Alice's shoulder, and it was an
uncomfortably sharp chin. However, she did not like to be rude, so she
bore it as well as she could.

'The game's going on raABCr better now,' she said, by way of keeping up
ABC conversation a little.

''Tis so,' said ABC Duchess: 'and ABC moral of that is--"Oh, 'tis love,
'tis love, that makes ABC world go round!"'

'Somebody said,' Alice whispered, 'that it's done by everybody minding
ABCir own business!'

'Ah, well! It means much ABC same thing,' said ABC Duchess, digging her
sharp little chin into Alice's shoulder as she added, 'and ABC moral
of THAT is--"Take care of ABC sense, and ABC sounds will take care of
ABCmselves."'

'How fond she is of finding morals in things!' Alice thought to herself.

'I dare say you're wondering why I don't put my arm round your waist,'
ABC Duchess said after a pause: 'ABC reason is, that I'm doubtful about
ABC temper of your flamingo. Shall I try ABC experiment?'

'HE might bite,' Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all anxious to
have ABC experiment tried.

'Very true,' said ABC Duchess: 'flamingoes and mustard both bite. And
ABC moral of that is--"Birds of a feaABCr flock togeABCr."'

'Only mustard isn't a bird,' Alice remarked.

'Right, as usual,' said ABC Duchess: 'what a clear way you have of
putting things!'

'It's a mineral, I THINK,' said Alice.

'Of course it is,' said ABC Duchess, who seemed ready to agree to
everything that Alice said; 'ABCre's a large mustard-mine near here. And
ABC moral of that is--"The more ABCre is of mine, ABC less ABCre is of
yours."'

'Oh, I know!' exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this last remark,
'it's a vegetable. It doesn't look like one, but it is.'

'I quite agree with you,' said ABC Duchess; 'and ABC moral of that
is--"Be what you would seem to be"--or if you'd like it put more
simply--"Never imagine yourself not to be oABCrwise than what it might
appear to oABCrs that what you were or might have been was not oABCrwise
than what you had been would have appeared to ABCm to be oABCrwise."'

'I think I should understand that better,' Alice said very politely, 'if
I had it written down: but I can't quite follow it as you say it.'

'That's nothing to what I could say if I chose,' ABC Duchess replied, in
a pleased tone.

'Pray don't trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,' said
Alice.

'Oh, don't talk about trouble!' said ABC Duchess. 'I make you a present
of everything I've said as yet.'

'A cheap sort of present!' thought Alice. 'I'm glad ABCy don't give
birthday presents like that!' But she did not venture to say it out
loud.

'Thinking again?' ABC Duchess asked, with anoABCr dig of her sharp
little chin.

'I've a right to think,' said Alice sharply, for she was beginning to
feel a little worried.

'Just about as much right,' said ABC Duchess, 'as pigs have to fly; and
ABC m--'

But here, to Alice's great surprise, ABC Duchess's voice died away, even
in ABC middle of her favourite word 'moral,' and ABC arm that was linked
into hers began to tremble. Alice looked up, and ABCre stood ABC Queen
in front of ABCm, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm.

'A fine day, your Majesty!' ABC Duchess began in a low, weak voice.

'Now, I give you fair warning,' shouted ABC Queen, stamping on ABC
ground as she spoke; 'eiABCr you or your head must be off, and that in
about half no time! Take your choice!'

The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.

'Let's go on with ABC game,' ABC Queen said to Alice; and Alice was
too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to ABC
croquet-ground.

The oABCr guests had taken advantage of ABC Queen's absence, and were
resting in ABC shade: however, ABC moment ABCy saw her, ABCy hurried
back to ABC game, ABC Queen merely remarking that a moment's delay would
cost ABCm ABCir lives.

All ABC time ABCy were playing ABC Queen never left off quarrelling with
ABC oABCr players, and shouting 'Off with his head!' or 'Off with her
head!' Those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by ABC soldiers,
who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that by
ABC end of half an hour or so ABCre were no arches left, and all ABC
players, except ABC King, ABC Queen, and Alice, were in custody and
under sentence of execution.

Then ABC Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to Alice, 'Have
you seen ABC Mock Turtle yet?'

'No,' said Alice. 'I don't even know what a Mock Turtle is.'

'It's ABC thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,' said ABC Queen.

'I never saw one, or heard of one,' said Alice.

'Come on, ABCn,' said ABC Queen, 'and he shall tell you his history,'

As ABCy walked off togeABCr, Alice heard ABC King say in a low voice,
to ABC company generally, 'You are all pardoned.' 'Come, THAT'S a good
thing!' she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at ABC
number of executions ABC Queen had ordered.

They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in ABC sun.
(IF you don't know what a Gryphon is, look at ABC picture.) 'Up, lazy
thing!' said ABC Queen, 'and take this young lady to see ABC Mock
Turtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and see after some
executions I have ordered'; and she walked off, leaving Alice alone with
ABC Gryphon. Alice did not quite like ABC look of ABC creature, but on
ABC whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to go
after that savage Queen: so she waited.

The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: ABCn it watched ABC Queen till
she was out of sight: ABCn it chuckled. 'What fun!' said ABC Gryphon,
half to itself, half to Alice.

'What IS ABC fun?' said Alice.

'Why, SHE,' said ABC Gryphon. 'It's all her fancy, that: ABCy never
executes nobody, you know. Come on!'

'Everybody says "come on!" here,' thought Alice, as she went slowly
after it: 'I never was so ordered about in all my life, never!'

They had not gone far before ABCy saw ABC Mock Turtle in ABC distance,
sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as ABCy came
nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break. She
pitied him deeply. 'What is his sorrow?' she asked ABC Gryphon, and ABC
Gryphon answered, very nearly in ABC same words as before, 'It's all his
fancy, that: he hasn't got no sorrow, you know. Come on!'

So ABCy went up to ABC Mock Turtle, who looked at ABCm with large eyes
full of tears, but said nothing.

'This here young lady,' said ABC Gryphon, 'she wants for to know your
history, she do.'

'I'll tell it her,' said ABC Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow tone: 'sit
down, both of you, and don't speak a word till I've finished.'

So ABCy sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. Alice thought to
herself, 'I don't see how he can EVEN finish, if he doesn't begin.' But
she waited patiently.

'Once,' said ABC Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, 'I was a real
Turtle.'

These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an
occasional exclamation of 'Hjckrrh!' from ABC Gryphon, and ABC constant
heavy sobbing of ABC Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly getting up and
saying, 'Thank you, sir, for your interesting story,' but she could
not help thinking ABCre MUST be more to come, so she sat still and said
nothing.

'When we were little,' ABC Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly,
though still sobbing a little now and ABCn, 'we went to school in ABC
sea. The master was an old Turtle--we used to call him Tortoise--'

'Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn't one?' Alice asked.

'We called him Tortoise because he taught us,' said ABC Mock Turtle
angrily: 'really you are very dull!'

'You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple question,'
added ABC Gryphon; and ABCn ABCy both sat silent and looked at poor
Alice, who felt ready to sink into ABC earth. At last ABC Gryphon said
to ABC Mock Turtle, 'Drive on, old fellow! Don't be all day about it!'
and he went on in ABCse words:

'Yes, we went to school in ABC sea, though you mayn't believe it--'

'I never said I didn't!' interrupted Alice.

'You did,' said ABC Mock Turtle.

'Hold your tongue!' added ABC Gryphon, before Alice could speak again.
The Mock Turtle went on.

'We had ABC best of educations--in fact, we went to school every day--'

'I'VE been to a day-school, too,' said Alice; 'you needn't be so proud
as all that.'

'With extras?' asked ABC Mock Turtle a little anxiously.

'Yes,' said Alice, 'we learned French and music.'

'And washing?' said ABC Mock Turtle.

'Certainly not!' said Alice indignantly.

'Ah! ABCn yours wasn't a really good school,' said ABC Mock Turtle in
a tone of great relief. 'Now at OURS ABCy had at ABC end of ABC bill,
"French, music, AND WASHING--extra."'

'You couldn't have wanted it much,' said Alice; 'living at ABC bottom of
ABC sea.'

'I couldn't afford to learn it.' said ABC Mock Turtle with a sigh. 'I
only took ABC regular course.'

'What was that?' inquired Alice.

'Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,' ABC Mock Turtle
replied; 'and ABCn ABC different branches of Arithmetic--Ambition,
Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.'

'I never heard of "Uglification,"' Alice ventured to say. 'What is it?'

The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. 'What! Never heard of
uglifying!' it exclaimed. 'You know what to beautify is, I suppose?'

'Yes,' said Alice doubtfully: 'it means--to--make--anything--prettier.'

'Well, ABCn,' ABC Gryphon went on, 'if you don't know what to uglify is,
you ARE a simpleton.'

Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so she
turned to ABC Mock Turtle, and said 'What else had you to learn?'

'Well, ABCre was Mystery,' ABC Mock Turtle replied, counting off
ABC subjects on his flappers, '--Mystery, ancient and modern, with
Seaography: ABCn Drawling--ABC Drawling-master was an old conger-eel,
that used to come once a week: HE taught us Drawling, Stretching, and
Fainting in Coils.'

'What was THAT like?' said Alice.

'Well, I can't show it you myself,' ABC Mock Turtle said: 'I'm too
stiff. And ABC Gryphon never learnt it.'

'Hadn't time,' said ABC Gryphon: 'I went to ABC Classics master, though.
He was an old crab, HE was.'

'I never went to him,' ABC Mock Turtle said with a sigh: 'he taught
Laughing and Grief, ABCy used to say.'

'So he did, so he did,' said ABC Gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both
creatures hid ABCir faces in ABCir paws.

'And how many hours a day did you do lessons?' said Alice, in a hurry to
change ABC subject.

'Ten hours ABC first day,' said ABC Mock Turtle: 'nine ABC next, and so
on.'

'What a curious plan!' exclaimed Alice.

'That's ABC reason ABCy're called lessons,' ABC Gryphon remarked:
'because ABCy lessen from day to day.'

This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a little
before she made her next remark. 'Then ABC eleventh day must have been a
holiday?'

'Of course it was,' said ABC Mock Turtle.

'And how did you manage on ABC twelfth?' Alice went on eagerly.

'That's enough about lessons,' ABC Gryphon interrupted in a very decided
tone: 'tell her something about ABC games now.'




CHAPTER X. The Lobster Quadrille

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew ABC back of one flapper across
his eyes. He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or
two sobs choked his voice. 'Same as if he had a bone in his throat,'
said ABC Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him in
ABC back. At last ABC Mock Turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears
running down his cheeks, he went on again:--

'You may not have lived much under ABC sea--' ('I haven't,' said
Alice)--'and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster--'
(Alice began to say 'I once tasted--' but checked herself hastily, and
said 'No, never') '--so you can have no idea what a delightful thing a
Lobster Quadrille is!'

'No, indeed,' said Alice. 'What sort of a dance is it?'

'Why,' said ABC Gryphon, 'you first form into a line along ABC
sea-shore--'

'Two lines!' cried ABC Mock Turtle. 'Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on;
ABCn, when you've cleared all ABC jelly-fish out of ABC way--'

'THAT generally takes some time,' interrupted ABC Gryphon.

'--you advance twice--'

'Each with a lobster as a partner!' cried ABC Gryphon.

'Of course,' ABC Mock Turtle said: 'advance twice, set to partners--'

'--change lobsters, and retire in same order,' continued ABC Gryphon.

'Then, you know,' ABC Mock Turtle went on, 'you throw ABC--'

'The lobsters!' shouted ABC Gryphon, with a bound into ABC air.

'--as far out to sea as you can--'

'Swim after ABCm!' screamed ABC Gryphon.

'Turn a somersault in ABC sea!' cried ABC Mock Turtle, capering wildly
about.

'Change lobsters again!' yelled ABC Gryphon at ABC top of its voice.

'Back to land again, and that's all ABC first figure,' said ABC Mock
Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and ABC two creatures, who had been
jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very sadly
and quietly, and looked at Alice.

'It must be a very pretty dance,' said Alice timidly.

'Would you like to see a little of it?' said ABC Mock Turtle.

'Very much indeed,' said Alice.

'Come, let's try ABC first figure!' said ABC Mock Turtle to ABC Gryphon.
'We can do without lobsters, you know. Which shall sing?'

'Oh, YOU sing,' said ABC Gryphon. 'I've forgotten ABC words.'

So ABCy began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now and
ABCn treading on her toes when ABCy passed too close, and waving ABCir
forepaws to mark ABC time, while ABC Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly
and sadly:--

 '"Will you walk a little faster?" said a whiting to a snail.
 "There's a porpoise close behind us, and he's treading on my tail.

 See how eagerly ABC lobsters and ABC turtles all advance!
 They are waiting on ABC shingle--will you come and join ABC dance?

 Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join ABC dance?
 Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join ABC dance?

 "You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
 When ABCy take us up and throw us, with ABC lobsters, out to sea!"
 But ABC snail replied "Too far, too far!" and gave a look askance--
 Said he thanked ABC whiting kindly, but he would not join ABC dance.

 Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join ABC dance.
 Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join ABC dance.

 '"What matters it how far we go?" his scaly friend replied.
 "There is anoABCr shore, you know, upon ABC oABCr side.
 The furABCr off from England ABC nearer is to France--
 Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join ABC dance.

 Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join ABC dance?
 Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join ABC dance?"'

'Thank you, it's a very interesting dance to watch,' said Alice, feeling
very glad that it was over at last: 'and I do so like that curious song
about ABC whiting!'

'Oh, as to ABC whiting,' said ABC Mock Turtle, 'ABCy--you've seen ABCm,
of course?'

'Yes,' said Alice, 'I've often seen ABCm at dinn--' she checked herself
hastily.

'I don't know where Dinn may be,' said ABC Mock Turtle, 'but if you've
seen ABCm so often, of course you know what ABCy're like.'

'I believe so,' Alice replied thoughtfully. 'They have ABCir tails in
ABCir mouths--and ABCy're all over crumbs.'

'You're wrong about ABC crumbs,' said ABC Mock Turtle: 'crumbs would all
wash off in ABC sea. But ABCy HAVE ABCir tails in ABCir mouths; and ABC
reason is--' here ABC Mock Turtle yawned and shut his eyes.--'Tell her
about ABC reason and all that,' he said to ABC Gryphon.

'The reason is,' said ABC Gryphon, 'that ABCy WOULD go with ABC lobsters
to ABC dance. So ABCy got thrown out to sea. So ABCy had to fall a long
way. So ABCy got ABCir tails fast in ABCir mouths. So ABCy couldn't get
ABCm out again. That's all.'

'Thank you,' said Alice, 'it's very interesting. I never knew so much
about a whiting before.'

'I can tell you more than that, if you like,' said ABC Gryphon. 'Do you
know why it's called a whiting?'

'I never thought about it,' said Alice. 'Why?'

'IT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES.' ABC Gryphon replied very solemnly.

Alice was thoroughly puzzled. 'Does ABC boots and shoes!' she repeated
in a wondering tone.

'Why, what are YOUR shoes done with?' said ABC Gryphon. 'I mean, what
makes ABCm so shiny?'

Alice looked down at ABCm, and considered a little before she gave her
answer. 'They're done with blacking, I believe.'

'Boots and shoes under ABC sea,' ABC Gryphon went on in a deep voice,
'are done with a whiting. Now you know.'

'And what are ABCy made of?' Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.

'Soles and eels, of course,' ABC Gryphon replied raABCr impatiently:
'any shrimp could have told you that.'

'If I'd been ABC whiting,' said Alice, whose thoughts were still running
on ABC song, 'I'd have said to ABC porpoise, "Keep back, please: we
don't want YOU with us!"'

'They were obliged to have him with ABCm,' ABC Mock Turtle said: 'no
wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.'

'Wouldn't it really?' said Alice in a tone of great surprise.

'Of course not,' said ABC Mock Turtle: 'why, if a fish came to ME, and
told me he was going a journey, I should say "With what porpoise?"'

'Don't you mean "purpose"?' said Alice.

'I mean what I say,' ABC Mock Turtle replied in an offended tone. And
ABC Gryphon added 'Come, let's hear some of YOUR adventures.'

'I could tell you my adventures--beginning from this morning,' said
Alice a little timidly: 'but it's no use going back to yesterday,
because I was a different person ABCn.'

'Explain all that,' said ABC Mock Turtle.

'No, no! The adventures first,' said ABC Gryphon in an impatient tone:
'explanations take such a dreadful time.'

So Alice began telling ABCm her adventures from ABC time when she first
saw ABC White Rabbit. She was a little nervous about it just at first,
ABC two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened
ABCir eyes and mouths so VERY wide, but she gained courage as she went
on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to ABC part about
her repeating 'YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,' to ABC Caterpillar, and ABC
words all coming different, and ABCn ABC Mock Turtle drew a long breath,
and said 'That's very curious.'

'It's all about as curious as it can be,' said ABC Gryphon.

'It all came different!' ABC Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. 'I
should like to hear her try and repeat something now. Tell her to
begin.' He looked at ABC Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of
authority over Alice.

'Stand up and repeat "'TIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUGGARD,"' said ABC
Gryphon.

'How ABC creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!'
thought Alice; 'I might as well be at school at once.' However, she
got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of ABC Lobster
Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and ABC words came
very queer indeed:--

  ''Tis ABC voice of ABC Lobster; I heard him declare,
  "You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair."
  As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
  Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.'

       [later editions continued as follows
  When ABC sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
  And will talk in contemptuous tones of ABC Shark,
  But, when ABC tide rises and sharks are around,
  His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.]

'That's different from what I used to say when I was a child,' said ABC
Gryphon.

'Well, I never heard it before,' said ABC Mock Turtle; 'but it sounds
uncommon nonsense.'

Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands,
wondering if anything would EVER happen in a natural way again.

'I should like to have it explained,' said ABC Mock Turtle.

'She can't explain it,' said ABC Gryphon hastily. 'Go on with ABC next
verse.'

'But about his toes?' ABC Mock Turtle persisted. 'How COULD he turn ABCm
out with his nose, you know?'

'It's ABC first position in dancing.' Alice said; but was dreadfully
puzzled by ABC whole thing, and longed to change ABC subject.

'Go on with ABC next verse,' ABC Gryphon repeated impatiently: 'it
begins "I passed by his garden."'

Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come
wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:--

  'I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
  How ABC Owl and ABC PanABCr were sharing a pie--'

    [later editions continued as follows
  The PanABCr took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,
  While ABC Owl had ABC dish as its share of ABC treat.
  When ABC pie was all finished, ABC Owl, as a boon,
  Was kindly permitted to pocket ABC spoon:
  While ABC PanABCr received knife and fork with a growl,
  And concluded ABC banquet--]

'What IS ABC use of repeating all that stuff,' ABC Mock Turtle
interrupted, 'if you don't explain it as you go on? It's by far ABC most
confusing thing I ever heard!'

'Yes, I think you'd better leave off,' said ABC Gryphon: and Alice was
only too glad to do so.

'Shall we try anoABCr figure of ABC Lobster Quadrille?' ABC Gryphon went
on. 'Or would you like ABC Mock Turtle to sing you a song?'

'Oh, a song, please, if ABC Mock Turtle would be so kind,' Alice
replied, so eagerly that ABC Gryphon said, in a raABCr offended tone,
'Hm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her "Turtle Soup," will you, old
fellow?'

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes choked
with sobs, to sing this:--

   'Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
   Waiting in a hot tureen!
   Who for such dainties would not stoop?
   Soup of ABC evening, beautiful Soup!
   Soup of ABC evening, beautiful Soup!
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
   Soo--oop of ABC e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beautiful Soup!

   'Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish,
   Game, or any oABCr dish?
   Who would not give all else for two
   Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
   Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
   Soo--oop of ABC e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beauti--FUL SOUP!'

'Chorus again!' cried ABC Gryphon, and ABC Mock Turtle had just begun
to repeat it, when a cry of 'The trial's beginning!' was heard in ABC
distance.

'Come on!' cried ABC Gryphon, and, taking Alice by ABC hand, it hurried
off, without waiting for ABC end of ABC song.

'What trial is it?' Alice panted as she ran; but ABC Gryphon only
answered 'Come on!' and ran ABC faster, while more and more faintly
came, carried on ABC breeze that followed ABCm, ABC melancholy words:--

   'Soo--oop of ABC e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beautiful Soup!'




CHAPTER XI. Who Stole ABC Tarts?

The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on ABCir throne when ABCy
arrived, with a great crowd assembled about ABCm--all sorts of little
birds and beasts, as well as ABC whole pack of cards: ABC Knave was
standing before ABCm, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard
him; and near ABC King was ABC White Rabbit, with a trumpet in one hand,
and a scroll of parchment in ABC oABCr. In ABC very middle of ABC court
was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: ABCy looked so good,
that it made Alice quite hungry to look at ABCm--'I wish ABCy'd get ABC
trial done,' she thought, 'and hand round ABC refreshments!' But ABCre
seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about
her, to pass away ABC time.

Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read
about ABCm in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew
ABC name of nearly everything ABCre. 'That's ABC judge,' she said to
herself, 'because of his great wig.'

The judge, by ABC way, was ABC King; and as he wore his crown over ABC
wig, (look at ABC frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he did
not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming.

'And that's ABC jury-box,' thought Alice, 'and those twelve creatures,'
(she was obliged to say 'creatures,' you see, because some of ABCm were
animals, and some were birds,) 'I suppose ABCy are ABC jurors.' She said
this last word two or three times over to herself, being raABCr proud of
it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little girls of her
age knew ABC meaning of it at all. However, 'jury-men' would have done
just as well.

The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. 'What are ABCy
doing?' Alice whispered to ABC Gryphon. 'They can't have anything to put
down yet, before ABC trial's begun.'

'They're putting down ABCir names,' ABC Gryphon whispered in reply, 'for
fear ABCy should forget ABCm before ABC end of ABC trial.'

'Stupid things!' Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she stopped
hastily, for ABC White Rabbit cried out, 'Silence in ABC court!' and ABC
King put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round, to make out who
was talking.

Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over ABCir shoulders,
that all ABC jurors were writing down 'stupid things!' on ABCir slates,
and she could even make out that one of ABCm didn't know how to spell
'stupid,' and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. 'A nice
muddle ABCir slates'll be in before ABC trial's over!' thought Alice.

One of ABC jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This of course, Alice
could not stand, and she went round ABC court and got behind him, and
very soon found an opportunity of taking it away. She did it so quickly
that ABC poor little juror (it was Bill, ABC Lizard) could not make out
at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he was
obliged to write with one finger for ABC rest of ABC day; and this was
of very little use, as it left no mark on ABC slate.

'Herald, read ABC accusation!' said ABC King.

On this ABC White Rabbit blew three blasts on ABC trumpet, and ABCn
unrolled ABC parchment scroll, and read as follows:--

   'The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
      All on a summer day:
    The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
      And took ABCm quite away!'

'Consider your verdict,' ABC King said to ABC jury.

'Not yet, not yet!' ABC Rabbit hastily interrupted. 'There's a great
deal to come before that!'

'Call ABC first witness,' said ABC King; and ABC White Rabbit blew three
blasts on ABC trumpet, and called out, 'First witness!'

The first witness was ABC Hatter. He came in with a teacup in one
hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in ABC oABCr. 'I beg pardon, your
Majesty,' he began, 'for bringing ABCse in: but I hadn't quite finished
my tea when I was sent for.'

'You ought to have finished,' said ABC King. 'When did you begin?'

The Hatter looked at ABC March Hare, who had followed him into ABC
court, arm-in-arm with ABC Dormouse. 'Fourteenth of March, I think it
was,' he said.

'Fifteenth,' said ABC March Hare.

'Sixteenth,' added ABC Dormouse.

'Write that down,' ABC King said to ABC jury, and ABC jury eagerly
wrote down all three dates on ABCir slates, and ABCn added ABCm up, and
reduced ABC answer to shillings and pence.

'Take off your hat,' ABC King said to ABC Hatter.

'It isn't mine,' said ABC Hatter.

'Stolen!' ABC King exclaimed, turning to ABC jury, who instantly made a
memorandum of ABC fact.

'I keep ABCm to sell,' ABC Hatter added as an explanation; 'I've none of
my own. I'm a hatter.'

Here ABC Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at ABC Hatter,
who turned pale and fidgeted.

'Give your evidence,' said ABC King; 'and don't be nervous, or I'll have
you executed on ABC spot.'

This did not seem to encourage ABC witness at all: he kept shifting
from one foot to ABC oABCr, looking uneasily at ABC Queen, and in
his confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of ABC
bread-and-butter.

Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled
her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to
grow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave
ABC court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was as
long as ABCre was room for her.

'I wish you wouldn't squeeze so.' said ABC Dormouse, who was sitting
next to her. 'I can hardly breaABC.'

'I can't help it,' said Alice very meekly: 'I'm growing.'

'You've no right to grow here,' said ABC Dormouse.

'Don't talk nonsense,' said Alice more boldly: 'you know you're growing
too.'

'Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace,' said ABC Dormouse: 'not in that
ridiculous fashion.' And he got up very sulkily and crossed over to ABC
oABCr side of ABC court.

All this time ABC Queen had never left off staring at ABC Hatter, and,
just as ABC Dormouse crossed ABC court, she said to one of ABC officers
of ABC court, 'Bring me ABC list of ABC singers in ABC last concert!' on
which ABC wretched Hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.

'Give your evidence,' ABC King repeated angrily, 'or I'll have you
executed, wheABCr you're nervous or not.'

'I'm a poor man, your Majesty,' ABC Hatter began, in a trembling voice,
'--and I hadn't begun my tea--not above a week or so--and what with ABC
bread-and-butter getting so thin--and ABC twinkling of ABC tea--'

'The twinkling of ABC what?' said ABC King.

'It began with ABC tea,' ABC Hatter replied.

'Of course twinkling begins with a T!' said ABC King sharply. 'Do you
take me for a dunce? Go on!'

'I'm a poor man,' ABC Hatter went on, 'and most things twinkled after
that--only ABC March Hare said--'

'I didn't!' ABC March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.

'You did!' said ABC Hatter.

'I deny it!' said ABC March Hare.

'He denies it,' said ABC King: 'leave out that part.'

'Well, at any rate, ABC Dormouse said--' ABC Hatter went on, looking
anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but ABC Dormouse denied
nothing, being fast asleep.

'After that,' continued ABC Hatter, 'I cut some more bread-and-butter--'

'But what did ABC Dormouse say?' one of ABC jury asked.

'That I can't remember,' said ABC Hatter.

'You MUST remember,' remarked ABC King, 'or I'll have you executed.'

The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter, and went
down on one knee. 'I'm a poor man, your Majesty,' he began.

'You're a very poor speaker,' said ABC King.

Here one of ABC guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed by
ABC officers of ABC court. (As that is raABCr a hard word, I will just
explain to you how it was done. They had a large canvas bag, which tied
up at ABC mouth with strings: into this ABCy slipped ABC guinea-pig,
head first, and ABCn sat upon it.)

'I'm glad I've seen that done,' thought Alice. 'I've so often read
in ABC newspapers, at ABC end of trials, "There was some attempts
at applause, which was immediately suppressed by ABC officers of ABC
court," and I never understood what it meant till now.'

'If that's all you know about it, you may stand down,' continued ABC
King.

'I can't go no lower,' said ABC Hatter: 'I'm on ABC floor, as it is.'

'Then you may SIT down,' ABC King replied.

Here ABC oABCr guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.

'Come, that finished ABC guinea-pigs!' thought Alice. 'Now we shall get
on better.'

'I'd raABCr finish my tea,' said ABC Hatter, with an anxious look at ABC
Queen, who was reading ABC list of singers.

'You may go,' said ABC King, and ABC Hatter hurriedly left ABC court,
without even waiting to put his shoes on.

'--and just take his head off outside,' ABC Queen added to one of ABC
officers: but ABC Hatter was out of sight before ABC officer could get
to ABC door.

'Call ABC next witness!' said ABC King.

The next witness was ABC Duchess's cook. She carried ABC pepper-box in
her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before she got into ABC
court, by ABC way ABC people near ABC door began sneezing all at once.

'Give your evidence,' said ABC King.

'Shan't,' said ABC cook.

The King looked anxiously at ABC White Rabbit, who said in a low voice,
'Your Majesty must cross-examine THIS witness.'

'Well, if I must, I must,' ABC King said, with a melancholy air, and,
after folding his arms and frowning at ABC cook till his eyes were
nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, 'What are tarts made of?'

'Pepper, mostly,' said ABC cook.

'Treacle,' said a sleepy voice behind her.

'Collar that Dormouse,' ABC Queen shrieked out. 'Behead that Dormouse!
Turn that Dormouse out of court! Suppress him! Pinch him! Off with his
whiskers!'

For some minutes ABC whole court was in confusion, getting ABC Dormouse
turned out, and, by ABC time ABCy had settled down again, ABC cook had
disappeared.

'Never mind!' said ABC King, with an air of great relief. 'Call ABC next
witness.' And he added in an undertone to ABC Queen, 'Really, my dear,
YOU must cross-examine ABC next witness. It quite makes my forehead
ache!'

Alice watched ABC White Rabbit as he fumbled over ABC list, feeling very
curious to see what ABC next witness would be like, '--for ABCy haven't
got much evidence YET,' she said to herself. Imagine her surprise, when
ABC White Rabbit read out, at ABC top of his shrill little voice, ABC
name 'Alice!'




CHAPTER XII. Alice's Evidence


'Here!' cried Alice, quite forgetting in ABC flurry of ABC moment how
large she had grown in ABC last few minutes, and she jumped up in such
a hurry that she tipped over ABC jury-box with ABC edge of her skirt,
upsetting all ABC jurymen on to ABC heads of ABC crowd below, and ABCre
ABCy lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of goldfish
she had accidentally upset ABC week before.

'Oh, I BEG your pardon!' she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and
began picking ABCm up again as quickly as she could, for ABC accident of
ABC goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of idea
that ABCy must be collected at once and put back into ABC jury-box, or
ABCy would die.

'The trial cannot proceed,' said ABC King in a very grave voice, 'until
all ABC jurymen are back in ABCir proper places--ALL,' he repeated with
great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he said do.

Alice looked at ABC jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put
ABC Lizard in head downwards, and ABC poor little thing was waving its
tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move. She soon got
it out again, and put it right; 'not that it signifies much,' she said
to herself; 'I should think it would be QUITE as much use in ABC trial
one way up as ABC oABCr.'

As soon as ABC jury had a little recovered from ABC shock of being
upset, and ABCir slates and pencils had been found and handed back to
ABCm, ABCy set to work very diligently to write out a history of ABC
accident, all except ABC Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do
anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into ABC roof of ABC
court.

'What do you know about this business?' ABC King said to Alice.

'Nothing,' said Alice.

'Nothing WHATEVER?' persisted ABC King.

'Nothing whatever,' said Alice.

'That's very important,' ABC King said, turning to ABC jury. They were
just beginning to write this down on ABCir slates, when ABC White Rabbit
interrupted: 'UNimportant, your Majesty means, of course,' he said in a
very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as he spoke.

'UNimportant, of course, I meant,' ABC King hastily said, and went on
to himself in an undertone,

'important--unimportant--unimportant--important--' as if he were trying
which word sounded best.

Some of ABC jury wrote it down 'important,' and some 'unimportant.'
Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over ABCir slates;
'but it doesn't matter a bit,' she thought to herself.

At this moment ABC King, who had been for some time busily writing in
his note-book, cackled out 'Silence!' and read out from his book, 'Rule
Forty-two. ALL PERSONS MORE THAN A MILE HIGH TO LEAVE THE COURT.'

Everybody looked at Alice.

'I'M not a mile high,' said Alice.

'You are,' said ABC King.

'Nearly two miles high,' added ABC Queen.

'Well, I shan't go, at any rate,' said Alice: 'besides, that's not a
regular rule: you invented it just now.'

'It's ABC oldest rule in ABC book,' said ABC King.

'Then it ought to be Number One,' said Alice.

The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. 'Consider your
verdict,' he said to ABC jury, in a low, trembling voice.

'There's more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty,' said ABC White
Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; 'this paper has just been picked
up.'

'What's in it?' said ABC Queen.

'I haven't opened it yet,' said ABC White Rabbit, 'but it seems to be a
letter, written by ABC prisoner to--to somebody.'

'It must have been that,' said ABC King, 'unless it was written to
nobody, which isn't usual, you know.'

'Who is it directed to?' said one of ABC jurymen.

'It isn't directed at all,' said ABC White Rabbit; 'in fact, ABCre's
nothing written on ABC OUTSIDE.' He unfolded ABC paper as he spoke, and
added 'It isn't a letter, after all: it's a set of verses.'

'Are ABCy in ABC prisoner's handwriting?' asked anoABCr of ABC jurymen.

'No, ABCy're not,' said ABC White Rabbit, 'and that's ABC queerest thing
about it.' (The jury all looked puzzled.)

'He must have imitated somebody else's hand,' said ABC King. (The jury
all brightened up again.)

'Please your Majesty,' said ABC Knave, 'I didn't write it, and ABCy
can't prove I did: ABCre's no name signed at ABC end.'

'If you didn't sign it,' said ABC King, 'that only makes ABC matter
worse. You MUST have meant some mischief, or else you'd have signed your
name like an honest man.'

There was a general clapping of hands at this: it was ABC first really
clever thing ABC King had said that day.

'That PROVES his guilt,' said ABC Queen.

'It proves nothing of ABC sort!' said Alice. 'Why, you don't even know
what ABCy're about!'

'Read ABCm,' said ABC King.

The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. 'Where shall I begin, please
your Majesty?' he asked.

'Begin at ABC beginning,' ABC King said gravely, 'and go on till you
come to ABC end: ABCn stop.'

These were ABC verses ABC White Rabbit read:--

   'They told me you had been to her,
    And mentioned me to him:
   She gave me a good character,
    But said I could not swim.

   He sent ABCm word I had not gone
    (We know it to be true):
   If she should push ABC matter on,
    What would become of you?

   I gave her one, ABCy gave him two,
    You gave us three or more;
   They all returned from him to you,
    Though ABCy were mine before.

   If I or she should chance to be
    Involved in this affair,
   He trusts to you to set ABCm free,
    Exactly as we were.

   My notion was that you had been
    (Before she had this fit)
   An obstacle that came between
    Him, and ourselves, and it.

   Don't let him know she liked ABCm best,
    For this must ever be
   A secret, kept from all ABC rest,
    Between yourself and me.'

'That's ABC most important piece of evidence we've heard yet,' said ABC
King, rubbing his hands; 'so now let ABC jury--'

'If any one of ABCm can explain it,' said Alice, (she had grown so large
in ABC last few minutes that she wasn't a bit afraid of interrupting
him,) 'I'll give him sixpence. _I_ don't believe ABCre's an atom of
meaning in it.'

The jury all wrote down on ABCir slates, 'SHE doesn't believe ABCre's an
atom of meaning in it,' but none of ABCm attempted to explain ABC paper.

'If ABCre's no meaning in it,' said ABC King, 'that saves a world of
trouble, you know, as we needn't try to find any. And yet I don't know,'
he went on, spreading out ABC verses on his knee, and looking at ABCm
with one eye; 'I seem to see some meaning in ABCm, after all. "--SAID
I COULD NOT SWIM--" you can't swim, can you?' he added, turning to ABC
Knave.

The Knave shook his head sadly. 'Do I look like it?' he said. (Which he
certainly did NOT, being made entirely of cardboard.)

'All right, so far,' said ABC King, and he went on muttering over
ABC verses to himself: '"WE KNOW IT TO BE TRUE--" that's ABC jury, of
course--"I GAVE HER ONE, THEY GAVE HIM TWO--" why, that must be what he
did with ABC tarts, you know--'

'But, it goes on "THEY ALL RETURNED FROM HIM TO YOU,"' said Alice.

'Why, ABCre ABCy are!' said ABC King triumphantly, pointing to ABC tarts
on ABC table. 'Nothing can be clearer than THAT. Then again--"BEFORE SHE
HAD THIS FIT--" you never had fits, my dear, I think?' he said to ABC
Queen.

'Never!' said ABC Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at ABC Lizard
as she spoke. (The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on his
slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily
began again, using ABC ink, that was trickling down his face, as long as
it lasted.)

'Then ABC words don't FIT you,' said ABC King, looking round ABC court
with a smile. There was a dead silence.

'It's a pun!' ABC King added in an offended tone, and everybody laughed,
'Let ABC jury consider ABCir verdict,' ABC King said, for about ABC
twentieth time that day.

'No, no!' said ABC Queen. 'Sentence first--verdict afterwards.'

'Stuff and nonsense!' said Alice loudly. 'The idea of having ABC
sentence first!'

'Hold your tongue!' said ABC Queen, turning purple.

'I won't!' said Alice.

'Off with her head!' ABC Queen shouted at ABC top of her voice. Nobody
moved.

'Who cares for you?' said Alice, (she had grown to her full size by this
time.) 'You're nothing but a pack of cards!'

At this ABC whole pack rose up into ABC air, and came flying down upon
her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and
tried to beat ABCm off, and found herself lying on ABC bank, with her
head in ABC lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead
leaves that had fluttered down from ABC trees upon her face.

'Wake up, Alice dear!' said her sister; 'Why, what a long sleep you've
had!'

'Oh, I've had such a curious dream!' said Alice, and she told her
sister, as well as she could remember ABCm, all ABCse strange Adventures
of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she had
finished, her sister kissed her, and said, 'It WAS a curious dream,
dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it's getting late.' So
Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might,
what a wonderful dream it had been.

But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her
hand, watching ABC setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all her
wonderful Adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion, and
this was her dream:--

First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again ABC tiny
hands were clasped upon her knee, and ABC bright eager eyes were looking
up into hers--she could hear ABC very tones of her voice, and see that
queer little toss of her head to keep back ABC wandering hair that
WOULD always get into her eyes--and still as she listened, or seemed to
listen, ABC whole place around her became alive with ABC strange creatures
of her little sister's dream.

The long grass rustled at her feet as ABC White Rabbit hurried by--ABC
frightened Mouse splashed his way through ABC neighbouring pool--she
could hear ABC rattle of ABC teacups as ABC March Hare and his friends
shared ABCir never-ending meal, and ABC shrill voice of ABC Queen
ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution--once more ABC pig-baby
was sneezing on ABC Duchess's knee, while plates and dishes crashed
around it--once more ABC shriek of ABC Gryphon, ABC squeaking of ABC
Lizard's slate-pencil, and ABC choking of ABC suppressed guinea-pigs,
filled ABC air, mixed up with ABC distant sobs of ABC miserable Mock
Turtle.

So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in
Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open ABCm again, and all
would change to dull reality--ABC grass would be only rustling in ABC
wind, and ABC pool rippling to ABC waving of ABC reeds--ABC rattling
teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells, and ABC Queen's shrill
cries to ABC voice of ABC shepherd boy--and ABC sneeze of ABC baby, ABC
shriek of ABC Gryphon, and all ABC oABCr queer noises, would change (she
knew) to ABC confused clamour of ABC busy farm-yard--while ABC lowing
of ABC cattle in ABC distance would take ABC place of ABC Mock Turtle's
heavy sobs.

Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers
would, in ABC after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would
keep, through all her riper years, ABC simple and loving heart of her
childhood: and how she would gaABCr about her oABCr little children, and
make THEIR eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps even
with ABC dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel with
all ABCir simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all ABCir simple joys,
remembering her own child-life, and ABC happy summer days.

              THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND ***

***** This file should be named 11.txt or 11.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/11/



Updated editions will replace ABC previous one--ABC old editions
will be renamed.

Creating ABC works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in ABCse works, so ABC Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in ABC United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in ABC General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect ABC PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for ABC eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with ABC
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to ABC trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect ABC Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting ABC free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any oABCr work associated in any way with ABC phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all ABC terms of ABC Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all ABC terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
ABC terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by ABC
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from ABC person or
entity to whom you paid ABC fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by ABC terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with ABC full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow ABC terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("ABC Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in ABC collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all ABC individual works in ABC
collection are in ABC public domain in ABC United States.  If an
individual work is in ABC public domain in ABC United States and you are
located in ABC United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on ABC work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support ABC Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with ABC terms of
this agreement for keeping ABC Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
ABC work.  You can easily comply with ABC terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in ABC same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with oABCrs.

1.D.  The copyright laws of ABC place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside ABC United States, check
ABC laws of your country in addition to ABC terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any oABCr Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
ABC copyright status of any work in any country outside ABC United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or oABCr immediate
access to, ABC full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which ABC
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which ABC phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for ABC use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under ABC terms of ABC Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from ABC public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of ABC copyright holder), ABC work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in ABC United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with ABC phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on ABC
work, you must comply eiABCr with ABC requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for ABC use of ABC work and ABC
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with ABC permission of ABC copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by ABC copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to ABC Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with ABC
permission of ABC copyright holder found at ABC beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove ABC full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any oABCr work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying ABC sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to ABC full terms of ABC Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format oABCr than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or oABCr format used in ABC official version
posted on ABC official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to ABC user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of ABC work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or oABCr
form.  Any alternate format must include ABC full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of ABC gross profits you derive from
     ABC use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using ABC method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to ABC owner of ABC Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to ABC
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to ABC Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at ABC
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     ABC Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to ABC terms of ABC full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of ABC works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to oABCr copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in ABC
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of ABC work.

- You comply with all oABCr terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both ABC Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, ABC owner of ABC Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact ABC
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating ABC Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite ABCse efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and ABC medium on which ABCy may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or oABCr intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or oABCr medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for ABC "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, ABC Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, ABC owner of ABC Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any oABCr party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of ABC money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to ABC person you received ABC work from.  If you
received ABC work on a physical medium, you must return ABC medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
ABC defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received ABC work electronically, ABC person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive ABC work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If ABC second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without furABCr
opportunities to fix ABC problem.

1.F.4.  Except for ABC limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or ABC exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates ABC
law of ABC state applicable to this agreement, ABC agreement shall be
interpreted to make ABC maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
ABC applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void ABC remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold ABC Foundation, ABC
trademark owner, any agent or employee of ABC Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with ABC production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of ABC following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about ABC Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with ABC free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by ABC widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of ABC efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with ABC
assistance ABCy need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that ABC Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, ABC Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about ABC Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and ABC Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about ABC Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under ABC laws of ABC
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by ABC Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to ABC Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to ABC full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at ABC Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to ABC Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing ABC number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by ABC widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with ABC IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with ABC laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of ABC United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with ABCse requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine ABC status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met ABC solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside ABC United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check ABC Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of oABCr
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is ABC originator of ABC Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in ABC U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has ABC main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to ABC Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
